









































Sd

<P
—=> bb

SUSTAINABLE

SALMON FARMING:

THE FUTURE OF FOOD

ea





SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
2

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
3

TABLE OF 
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION	 04	

	 OCEAN STEWARDSHIP	 08

	 CLIMATE CHANGE	 20

	 NUTRITION	 30

	 SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY	 38

	 SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS PRACTICES	 48

GSI’S PLANS FOR THE FUTURE	 56

GLOSSARY	 58

REFERENCES	 60

Source: BakkaFrost
3



4
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

Introducing aquaculture2

•	 Aquaculture is the farming of fish, shellfish,  
or mollusks in water

•	 It is one of the most eco-efficient forms of  
protein production

•	 More than 50% of seafood eaten worldwide comes 
from aquaculture

•	 It is the fastest growing global food production sector 

•	 The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
estimates that close to 90% of wild fish stocks  
are fished at, or above, sustainable levels 

•	 The planet is 70% ocean, which means that  
if aquaculture is performed correctly, the  
oceans can offer a significant contribution  
to a sustainable food system3

INTRODUCTION

Every industry has been experiencing rapid, 
extensive, and sometimes devastating change 
over the past few years, and the food industry 
is no exception. 

Our world is changing—populations are 
growing, our climate is changing, and there is 
more pressure than ever on our food systems. 
The demand for food is set to increase by 
50%, and demand for animal-based foods  
by nearly 70%.

However, we cannot continue to produce  
more food on land to meet this growing 
demand. Animal agriculture has a vast 
environmental footprint, and is responsible  
for more greenhouse gases than all the  
world’s transportation systems combined.

In order to feed almost 10 billion people by 
2050, we need to rethink current food systems 
and find a new approach, which supports 
greater food security globally, positively 
contributes to human health, and reduces 
pressures on the environment.1 It is not simply a 
case of producing more food, we need a more 
sustainable and efficient food system. 

In this resource, we take a deeper look into 
the role farmed salmon can play in future food 
systems and the work we, as the Global Salmon 
Initiative (GSI), are doing to ensure our industry 
is adapting and improving at the speed and 
scale the world needs.

A constantly evolving world

“Since 1961 the annual global growth in fish 
consumption has been twice as high as 
population growth, demonstrating that the 
fisheries and aquaculture sector is crucial in 
meeting FAO’s goal of a world without hunger 
and malnutrition”
-José Graziano da Silva, FAO Director-General

Source: iStock
5



7
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

7

The GSI
We believe that ambitious goals, greater collaboration  
and greater transparency are the drivers to a more 
sustainable food system. Uniting 50% of the global  
farmed salmon sector, we have set a clear objective 
of providing a healthy and sustainable source of protein,  
while minimizing environmental impact and continuing  
to improve our social and economic contributions.  
By combining global expertise, we have created a  
solution-focused knowledge-sharing platform to identify 
challenges, foster development of advanced farming 
approaches, and drive the environmental improvements  
the industry needs to enhance its sustainability profile.

Responsible 
Farming Transparency Feed Fish Health  

and Welfare

Commited to 100%  
ASC certification

Annual Sustainability 
Report

Innovations for greater 
sustainability in feed 

ingredients

Knowledge sharing 
to drive continuous 

improvements in  
best practices

Our Priorities

Basing our work on four key pathways to the future: responsibility, transparency, collaboration and 
innovation—we believe we can be the change drivers in ensuring salmon farming continues to be  
part of the solution of future food systems. Salmon aquaculture offers great potential in providing a 
healthy and sustainable protein, but like any industry, as we face new challenges daily, we must focus  
on continuous improvements to ensure a long-term sustainable future. 

RESPONSIBILITY

TRANSPARENCY

COLLABORATION

INNOVATION

“We must plant the sea 
and herd its animals using 
the sea as farmers instead 
of hunters. That is what 
civilization is all about—
farming replacing hunting”
-Jaques-Yves Cousteau, Oceanographer

 

GSI PATHWAYS TO THE FUTURE

Source: BakkaFrost
6

PRODUCERS SUPPLY CHAIN
ASSOCIATES

OPERATING
REGIONS

MEMBER
COMPANIES



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
8

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
9

The ocean is the major 
regulating force in the 
earth’s climate system and 
represents the largest carbon 
sink on the planet
The world’s oceans are essential for life on our 
planet, but they are under threat from the effects 
of climate change, pollution, loss of biodiversity 
and unsustainable use. Safeguarding our oceans 
for future generations is a shared responsibility 
and a matter of global urgency.4 

As ocean farmers, we understand that the future 
of salmon farming depends on clean and healthy 
oceans—where protection and production go 
hand in hand.3 To have healthy salmon, we need 
healthy oceans.

of the  
Earth’s surface

Covers

70% Largest

on the planet
biosphere

Home to

of all life on Earth

50–80%

Generates

of the Earth’s 
oxygen

50%
Absorbs

of all C02 
emissions

25%

The Ocean Opportunity

Source: iStock



The ocean currently provides 
the largest source of protein 
for humans5

Oceans are the foundation 
for vibrant economies

$2.5 trillion
is generated each year from 
goods and services from the 
ocean—an amount expected 

to double by 20308

10–12%
of the world’s population 
relies on the fisheries and 
aquaculture sectors for  

their livelihoods7

7th largest
The ocean is the

economy in the  
world today5

40%
Seafood is the 

primary source of 
protein for almost

of the global  
population6

~3 billion
people rely on the ocean  

for vital nutrition6

Source: Shutterstock
10



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
12

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
13

A responsible  
blue revolution  
for healthy oceans  
and healthy people  

Land-based agriculture will not be enough to meet future 
food demands. Our planet is 70% ocean, yet only 5% of our 
food comes from there. As the pressure grows to produce 
more food and the limits to traditional agriculture become 
more apparent, people will look to the oceans.

Current wild fish stocks are not able to fulfill the growing 
demand. We need to establish solutions to reverse trends of overfishing and restore wild stocks, without 
leaving a gap in demand for seafood. A sustainable supply of fish for consumption is therefore needed, 
and aquaculture can play an important role here but only if the industry continues to invest in improving 
its sustainability performance.

By scaling up aquaculture, in a responsible manner, we can meet the growing demands for protein and 
fish, and alleviate pressure on wild fish stocks, allowing them to recover. 

13
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

12
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

SEAFOOD CONSUMPTION:  
A CHANGING LANDSCAPE

A population that is at an abundance level that produces  
the maximum sustainable yield is called “fully-exploited”  
or “fully-fished”.

Currently, the United Nations (UN) FAO estimates that:3

50% of the seafood 
we eat is now 
farmed and this is 
projected to reach 
62% by 2030.10

Wild fish stocks cannot be exploited 
to feed more people.

However, consumption of seafood is increasing:3

Per capita consumption of 
seafood more than doubled 

between 1961 and 20156

Climate change could reduce the 
productivity of fisheries in the 

world’s exclusive economic zones 
by up to 12% by 20509 

If responsibly 
managed, 
aquaculture can 
provide eco-friendly 
and nutritious food 
while alleviating 
pressure on marine 
life and protecting 
ocean biodiversity.

Like all farmers, salmon producers have 
a duty to rear their animals responsibly. 
Salmon farming is the most advanced form 
of aquaculture, but the industry recognizes 
that if it is to expand to meet demands in 
a sustainable manner, it must continue to 
improve its environmental performance. 
Farmed salmon is high in protein and 
omega-3 fatty acids, offering a suitable 
alternative to meat.

33% 7%60%
of fisheries are  

fully-fished
of fisheries are  

over-fished
of fisheries are 
under-fished



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
14

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
15

Minimizing our impact through 100% ASC certification
GSI’s core mission is to ensure that our salmon farming 
operations are sustainable and support healthy oceans, 
with the lowest possible impact. However, it is not enough 
to simply say that we are changing and improving the 
sustainability of the salmon farming industry; we need to 
demonstrate the change with third-party validation. 

We chose the Aquaculture Stewardship Council (ASC) 
Salmon Standard because it is the most stringent certification 
that monitors and measures every aspect of a farm’s 
environmental and social performance, and motivates  
farms to continually improve. 

Certification is a timely and cost-intensive process that 
can take many months to complete and for this reason, is 
widely recognized as the leading certification for responsible 
aquaculture. GSI has committed to achieving 100% ASC 
certification across all member farms.

“ASC-certified salmon farms minimize impacts on 
the local ecosystem in a number of ways, such as 
the development and implementation of an impact 
assessment to protect birds, marine mammals and 
sensitive habitats, protection of the ecological quality 
of the seabed, ensuring farms are not sited in High 
Conservation Value Areas and minimizing fish escapes 
to an absolute minimum. All lethal incidents with wildlife 
must be made publicly available”11 
-The Aquaculture Stewardship Council 

Data for 14 companies, across all 8 operating regions

Transparently sharing our performance through the 
GSI Sustainability Report
Like any food production sector, salmon farming has an impact. Our aim is to minimize this impact and 
operate in a way which responsibly uses natural resources, and to transparently report on our impact and 
our progress in doing better.

The GSI annual Sustainability Report is published on our website, and documents our progress across many 
of the industry’s key sustainability metrics; openly sharing our environmental performance as a means of 
encouraging and accelerating improvements, as well as building trust with our stakeholders. 

65% ASC  
certified*

* Figure as of end of 2019

Source: Shutterstock
15

worth of data



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
16

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
17

The raw materials used in fish feed production 
have evolved greatly over the previous 

20 years. In the 1990s, fish meal and fish oil 
dominated the feed recipes. Thanks to technological 
breakthroughs, innovative ingredients, and research 
and development (R&D) efforts of the aquaculture 
industry, feed recipes are now formulated without 
dependency on scarce marine stocks and without 
compromising the nutritional needs of the fish. 
Our work with feed companies has supported 
the dramatic reduction in the feed conversion 
ratio (FCR) of farmed salmon over the past two 
decades. This is now down to 1:2 on average, 
making farmed salmon one of the most efficient 
animal proteins available.  

To further support a reduction in the use of marine 
ingredients, the farmed salmon sector has been 
supporting R&D into non-marine sources rich in 
omega-3 fatty acids, such as algae, canola crops 
and insects. In 2015, GSI and our associated 
feed companies launched a global tender to 
help identify commercially viable, non-marine 
alternative sources of omega-3 fatty acids. 
The tender was highly successful in highlighting 
the growing industry need for novel, non-marine 
alternatives and prompted a significant increase in 
the variety and number of options available to the 
industry. Industry feed companies are now working 
with multiple providers, incorporating these  
fish-free ingredients into industry feeds. 

OPTIMIZATION OF FISH BY-PRODUCTS
 
An important part of sustainability, and ocean conservation, is ensuring the highest utilization of all 
ocean resources. This is why in 2015, GSI partnered with the FAO and the University of Stirling, Stirling, 
UK, to map global resources of fisheries and aquaculture by-products (the fish parts not sold or used). 
This mapping project identified where there were available by-product resources, and allowed the FAO 
to promote greater utilization.

INNOVATION IN FEED INGREDIENTS

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

1995 2005 20102000 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Raw material evolution in fish feed production

Vegetable oils Fish oil Alternative 
sources of 
proteins  
and starch

Fish meal

BioMar, GSI Associate Member

Finding alternative 
sources of omega-3 
fatty acids

GSI members have reduced 
the amount of fish oil in 
feed from 24% to 11%

Omega-3 fatty acids, usually 
obtained from the fish oil 
in salmon feed, can also be 
found in non-marine sources 
such as algae or from crops  
like canola

Improvements in 
the forage fish 
dependency ratio 
(FFDR)

Optimization of fish 
by-products research

GSI members have reduced 
the amount of fish meal in 
feed from 65% to 18%

Redirect fish by-products 
to become a feed resource 
instead of going to waste

FFDR is the amount of 
wild fish needed in feed 
to produce 1 kg of farmed 
salmon. The lower the FFDR, 
the lower the inclusion 
percentage of wild fish

Following this research, new 
approaches were initiated to 
harness these fish by-products 
and redirect them

We need to produce 
fish feed without 
putting undue 
pressure on wild  
fish stocks or  
natural resources.

Reducing the 
reliance on wild 
fish for fish feed
Feed ingredients play an important 
role in the efficiency of salmon farming, 
and provide the salmon with all the 
protein and essential nutrients required 
for optimal health and growth. 

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD 17



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
18

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
19

GSI’s public commitment to Sustainable 
Development Goal 14
Responsible aquaculture has the ability to support many of the UN’s Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) and can directly affect and impact seven of the  
17 SDGs, but SDG 14 “Life below water” is our number 1 priority. Here is how  
we are using our efforts within GSI to reinforce our work as ocean stewards.

In terms of our commitment to being 
responsible ocean stewards, here is how the  
GSI supports SDG 14 to make this possible 
•	 Utilize GSI’s model of pre-competitive collaboration to promote accelerated 

improvements in responsible aquaculture

•	 Transparently report on environmental and social performance via GSI’s annual 
industry-wide Sustainability Report

•	 Drive industry innovation through continued partnerships and sharing  
of expertise

•	 Share knowledge and insights from salmon farming to developing aquaculture sectors 
to accelerate improvements and support aquaculture as a sustainable food source, and 
positive contributor to local communities and economies

REDUCING MARINE POLLUTION
 
Approximately 8 million tonnes of plastic enters the sea every year; if it continues at this rate, 
we face a possibility of having more plastic in the ocean than fish by 2050.

We see it as part of our role to reduce and remove plastic from the ocean, and there are three 
ways we are doing this:

We also have an opportunity to lead the way within our local communities by supporting greater 
awareness of environmental conservation and demonstrating our clear commitment to ending 
plastic pollution.

As salmon farmers, we believe that the oceans can 
provide a healthy food source for millions of people 
around the world, but this will only be possible if 
we each take our role as ocean stewards.

“One of the biggest innovations to have taken place in salmon 
farming in the past decade is the significant reduction in the use  
of wild fish as part of the farmed fish’s diet. Through innovation  
and improvements in feeding techniques, we have not only been 
able to reduce the amount of marine resources needed, but also 
been able to identify new novel resources to replace the marine  
oils we required before”

-Tor Eirik Homme, Director Feed and Nutrition at Grieg Seafood ASA

Recycling Reducing plastic use Beach clean-ups

Ventisqueros, Chile BakkaFrost, Faroe Islands



21
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

21

Climate change will 
affect how and where  
we produce food
Climate change 
The world’s leading climate scientists have warned 
that we only have 12 years remaining for global 
warming to be kept to a maximum of 1.5°C.  
After this point, even half a degree will 
significantly increase the risks of drought, 
floods, extreme heat and poverty for hundreds 
of millions of people. Climate change also has a 
direct impact on the oceans, dramatically altering 
ocean ecosystems, including rising sea levels and 
temperatures, acidification, and oxygen loss.

Keeping global warming to less than 1.5°C will 
only be achieved by reducing CO2 and other 
greenhouse gas emissions from all sectors, 
including food production.

Key impacts of climate change12 
•	 Rising temperatures

•	 Melting sea ice—sea-level rise

•	 Ocean acidification

•	 Changing climate—increasing 
precipitation and increasing droughts

•	 Reduction in availability  
of freshwater

•	 More extreme weather events 
affecting livestock and crops

•	 Reduced crop yields

ANNUAL GLOBAL TEMPERATURES 
FROM 1850 TO 2017

Warming Stripes, Professor Ed Hawkins  
(University of Reading)

Source: iStock



23
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

22
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

23

“The single biggest 
threat of climate 
change is the collapse  
of food systems” 

The impact of foods on climate change
•	 Agriculture contributes 17% of greenhouse gas emissions, and an additional 7–14% 

through changes in land use14 

•	 Raising livestock for meat, eggs and milk:15 

•	 Generates 14.5% of greenhouse gas emissions

•	 Is the second highest emitter of greenhouse gases

•	 Contributes more greenhouse gas emissions than all global transportation Aquaculture is the fastest-growing food industry 
in the world and already produces more biomass 
than either wild seafood or beef, making it a 
fundamental part of future food production.17

The impact of climate change on 
food production 
There is a direct risk that a changing climate will reduce production and 
productivity of many agriculture products:

Land currently used for agriculture or livestock farming will 
be required for climate change mitigation, i.e. reforestation to 
capture CO2 and growing energy crops to reduce reliance on 
fossil fuels

It is expected that impacts on stock productivity and fish 
migration patterns will decrease productivity in half of all 
fisheries worldwide16 

Rapid and large-scale changes, which do not damage natural resources or 
add to climate change, are needed to provide nutritious food to a burgeoning 
global population.

How does salmon farming fit into  
the picture? 

Farmed salmon is a healthy source of protein, with a low 
environmental impact and one of the lowest greenhouse gas 
profiles of all animal protein sources, offering an eco-friendly 
alternative to meat

With only 5% of oceans currently being used for food 
production, there is an opportunity for oceans to contribute 
to filling the protein gap—particularly as land sources are under 
pressure from a changing climate 

Source: BakkaFrost
22

-Jerry Hatfield, the director of the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s National 
Laboratory for Agriculture and the Environment13



25
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

24
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

25

When deciding which protein to eat, we 
should consider what is good for the planet 
and our health

COMPARED WITH BEEF, 
CHICKEN AND PORK, 
FARMED SALMON IS THE 
MOST PLANET-FRIENDLY 
CHOICE IN TERMS OF:

CARBON  
FOOTPRINT

LAND &  
WATER USE

FEED RESOURCES

FARMED SALMON IS  
HIGHLY NUTRITIOUS:

HIGH IN OMEGA-3S 
FOR HEALTHY  
HEART AND BRAIN

HIGH IN PROTEIN

RICH IN VITAMINS  
AND MINERALS

1.	 Hilborn et al., 2018. The Environmental Cost of Animal Source Foods

2.	 Poore & Nemecek, 2018. Reducing Food’s Environmental Impacts Through Producers and Consumers

3.	 Fry et al., 2017. Feed Conversion Efficiency in Aquaculture: Do We Measure it Correctly?
4.	 Mowi, 2019. Salmon Farming Industry Handbook

Land Use
The amount of land needed to produce 100 g of edible protein.

m
/

10
0

 g
 p

ro
te

in

200

150

100

3.7 7.1 11

50

0

102

185

28%

 

Protein retention describes the gain in edible protein as a percentage of the protein intake from food. 
It is calculated as a percentage (grams protein in edible portion / grams protein in feed).

Protein Retention

Feed Conversion Ratio1

(liter / kg edible meat)

Water Consumption2 

(grams CO2-equivalent / typical serving of 40 g edible protein)

Carbon Footprint1

* Figures reflect feed conversion ratio and carbon footprint of farmed Atlantic salmon.

1 Global Salmon Initiative (GSI) Sustainability Report. Available at: https://globalsalmoninitiative.org/en/sustainability-report/. Last accessed October 2019. 
2 Mowi. Salmon Farming Industry Handbook 2019. Available at: http://hugin.info/209/R/2246047/887370.pdf. Last accessed October 2019.

** Total water footprint for farmed salmon fillets in Scotland, in relation to weight and content of calories, protein and fat.

Farmed salmon is one of the most eco-efficient and sustainable forms of protein

Farmed Atlantic 
Salmon

37%
Chicken

21%
Pork

14%
Beef

No Data

Lamb

Role of salmon farming as a climate-friendly food
Studies show that aquaculture supports climate-friendly diets because it:17

Requires less  
fresh water

Utilizes fewer crops and 
less land (even if over 
one-third of protein 

production comes from 
aquaculture by 2050)

Has a lower carbon 
footprint than  

non-marine proteins 
(chicken, pork, beef)



27
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

26
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

27

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change has projected the impact of 
predicted global rising temperatures  
of 1.5°C.

All foods we eat have a climate impact. But when it comes to those impacts, 
not all foods are created equal. From plants and grains, to dairy and meat, 
the effects of our diets on global greenhouse gas emissions depend on the 
types of food we consume. Sustainable seafood is part of the solution to 
more climate-friendly diets.18

How GSI is speeding up 
improvements to further reduce  
the industry’s carbon footprint
Salmon farming is already an eco-efficient food production sector; however, 
with the current climate change issues, it is important that we continue to 
look for ways to improve our performance and reduce our carbon footprint. 

Here are two examples of ways our members are improving their carbon 
footprint using the GSI model of collaboration and innovation to  
accelerate improvements.

Dramatic action is needed to 
decelerate global warming and 
mitigate climate change

Case Studies
Cargill and Skretting are two established fish feed 

suppliers, working together to minimize the carbon 
footprint of feed delivery services for salmon farmers 
in Norway. Previously, cargo ships with Cargill’s 
feed would sail to farms along the Norwegian coast 
at the same time as other ships with Skretting feed. 
The companies realized that despite being business 
competitors, there was a way to optimize logistics, 
remove inefficiencies in the transport chain, and 
drastically improve the environmental footprint of 
transporting feed. It is estimated that the efficiency 
improvement will reduce emissions of greenhouse 
gases by one-fifth per ton of fish feed transported. 
This equates to 15–20 million kg of CO2 per year, which 
is equivalent to removing 7,500 cars from the roads 
every year.

Grieg Seafood ASA has become the first 
salmon farmer to install solar panels and 

a wind turbine at a salmon farm to reduce the 
use of a diesel generator. The renewable energy 
technology is being used at its Nordeimsøyna site 
in the Finnøy municipality, Norway, and was the 
idea of Helleik Syse, a master’s student from  
the University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.  
The project will reduce the site’s emissions of  
CO2 by 98 tons, as well as enable the plant to  
save about 36,000 liters of diesel a year. 

Source: Shutterstock
26



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
28

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
29

Ensuring responsible aquaculture
Like any growing industry, we will need to manage our carbon footprint as we 
look to the future and continually look for ways to reduce it. 

GSI member Salmones Camanchaca is leading the way with its commitment 
to being carbon-neutral by 2025.

“Our commitment to become carbon-neutral by 2025 is regarding our  
Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions of The Greenhouse Gas Protocol, as well 
as those related to the disposal of waste (Scope 3). In other words, our 
commitment encompasses all operations and processes upon which we 
have control over decisions that influence greenhouse gas emissions. 
Simultaneously, we will begin working with our suppliers to further reduce 
Scope 3 emissions and the footprint of our final product,” said Alfredo Tello, 
Technical and Sustainability Manager, Salmones Camanchaca.

To become carbon-neutral, Salmones Camanchaca will prioritize reducing 
its main sources of carbon emissions: fossil fuels, electricity and refrigerants. 
To achieve this they will partner with suppliers to optimize processes and 
introduce new approaches to reduce emissions. The company will also 
balance its carbon emissions with 1,000 hectares of forest heritage.

“The company’s forests have an 
estimated capacity to capture  
14,000 tons of carbon annually.  
We will implement specific forest  
stewardship plans that could allow  
us to compensate as much as half  
of Salmones Camanchaca’s  
current footprint” 

Source: BakkaFrost
28

-Alfredo Tello, Technical and Sustainability Manager, Salmones Camanchaca



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
313130

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

To ensure a healthy 
future for people and 
the planet, we need to 
closely consider both the 
amount and the types  
of food that we rely on. 

Our current dietary choices are not only putting 
enormous pressure on our food systems and 
the planet, but also on our quality of life, life 
expectancy and healthcare systems.19 In recent 
decades our diets have shifted away from 
mainly whole foods and seasonal plants 
rich in fiber, to more processed convenience 

foods higher in animal products, sugar, fat, 
and salt. This change in diet, combined with 
more sedentary lifestyles, is believed to be 
causing the ongoing increase in obesity and 
noncommunicable diseases (diabetes, cancer 
and cardiovascular disease) that are by far  
the leading cause of deaths worldwide.20

NUTRITIONAL BENEFITS OF SEAFOOD AND 
FARMED SALMON
 
Fish is a low-fat, high-quality protein that is high in marine omega-3 fatty acids, vitamins such as D and 
B2 (riboflavin), and nutrients to maintain brain and heart health. Salmon provides an excellent source of 
healthy unsaturated fats, which have been shown to improve cholesterol levels. 

Source: Shutterstock



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
32

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
33

EATING SEAFOOD 
2X PER WEEK:

Contributes to an 
increase in your 
omega-3 level

Benefits pregnant and 
nursing women and 

their babies

Leads to improved brain 
and eye development

Helps to reduce risks  
of heart disease

Farmed salmon is a source of highly absorbable:

Nutritional guidelines recommend eating at  
least 2 portions of fish per week21,22

PROTEIN MARINE OMEGA-3  
FATTY ACIDS

MANY VITAMINS 
AND MINERALS

NUTRIENT-DENSE 
FOODS
 
Nutrient-dense foods contain vitamins, 
minerals, complex carbohydrates, lean 
protein, and healthy fats, and they play 
an important role in ensuring we meet our 
individual nutritional requirements, without 
exceeding energy intake.

The best way of including nutrient-dense 
foods in your diet is to create a balanced 
diet centered on vegetables and fruit, with  
the addition of healthy proteins and 
unsaturated fats. 

Farmed salmon is a natural wholefood 
containing many nutrients, minerals, 
omega-3 fatty acids and protein,  
making it an excellent component  
in a nutrient-dense diet. 

The nutrients in farmed salmon 
support optimal health and 
protection from a range of 
diseases and disorders.

Responsibly farmed salmon has a role to play as a 
positive sustainable food choice for both human 
health and the health of the planet.

32
Source: iStock



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
3535

Omega-3 fatty acids 

Consumption of omega-3 fatty acids (EPA 
and DHA) is associated with:

Farmed salmon is one of the most eco-efficient and 
sustainable forms of protein available. With a low 
carbon footprint, high protein retention and efficient 
feed conversion ratio, farmed salmon can contribute 
a healthy and climate-friendly protein source to the 
world’s food needs.

Omega-3 fatty acids are essential fats that cannot be made in the human body, so must be included 
in our diet.26,27 Two omega-3 fatty acids—eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA)—are found in high quantities in oily fish such as salmon28 and salmon roe.29

Helping maintain a healthy heart by lowering blood pressure 
and triglycerides, and reducing the risk of sudden death, 
heart attack and stroke26–28 

Reducing the risk of 
coronary heart disease28,29 

Supporting brain 
function and 
development  
in infants30 

Possibly preventing 
psychiatric diseases 
particularly cognitive 
decline in the elderly31

Possibly preventing 
inflammation and 
reducing the risk  
of arthritis31,32

Aquaculture plays an important role in the efficient use 
of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids and their transfer to 
humans. GSI members are committed to ongoing efforts 
to ensure that the salmon we rear contain beneficial 
levels of marine omega-3 fatty acids, and we continue 
to source alternative sources of omega-3 fatty acids that 
provide consumers with the best nutritional benefits.

PROTEIN
Protein is an essential macronutrient and 
component of food that is critical for the 
structure, function, and regulation of human 
tissues and organs. Proteins are made up of 
amino acids; these are either essential or  
nonessential depending on whether they can be 
made by the human body. The protein quality 
of foods is then measured by the number of 
essential amino acids that the food contains.

Animal-based foods including fish are of the 
highest quality and are referred to as “complete” 
proteins, meaning that they provide the body 
with all the essential amino acids that it requires 
without additional supplementation from other 
protein sources.23 

100 g of farmed salmon 
provides ~20.5 g of protein, 
which is 44% of the daily 
required protein intake.24,25 

Source: iStock
34



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
37

Vitamins and minerals 
Some of the positive nutritional benefits of fish and farmed 
salmon are also due to the high concentration of vitamins 
and minerals, including several B vitamins, vitamin D and 
minerals such as selenium, iodine and potassium.26

Vitamin D deficiency is a global concern, and dietary intake 
of vitamin D from food or supplements is necessary for 
ensuring individuals meet optimal intake.33 Animal products 
provide the best sources, and oily fish such as salmon 
contain the highest natural amounts of vitamin D.

Healthy sustainable diets
Unhealthy diets are one of the major risk factors for a range 
of diseases, including cardiovascular diseases, cancer, 
diabetes and other conditions linked to obesity or being 
overweight. It is evident that the consumption of oily fish, 
which includes responsibly farmed salmon, is associated 
with several health benefits and it plays an important role 
in healthy sustainable diets. As a nutrient-rich, eco-efficient 
protein source, farmed salmon can help reduce our meat 
intake globally while maintaining the health benefits of 
consuming animal protein. Considering these two factors, 
farmed salmon should be considered as part of the solution 
to support the future health of people and the planet. 

The recommended nutrient intake 
of vitamin D proposed by the 
Scientific Advisory Committee  
on Nutrition is 10 µg/day. 

Consuming farmed salmon can play an important 
role in meeting our vitamin D requirements, and 
farmed salmon provides many other important 
vitamins and minerals essential for optimal health.

Source: iStock

Food Safety
We pride ourselves on producing high-quality farmed 
salmon, and as part of this we are committed to ensuring 
the highest levels of food safety. Working responsibly 
to meet and exceed regional food safety regulations, 
we also work with third-party certification schemes to 
validate the quality levels our customers expect.

36



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
393938

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

Without social responsibility, 
sustainable development is 
not possible. 
Three pillars underpin sustainable development:34

ECONOMICS
Healthy profits

ENVIRONMENT
Healthy planet

SOCIAL
Healthy people

What does social responsibility mean to the GSI?
For the GSI, social responsibility means businesses proactively managing the impacts of our 
operations and supporting employees, customers, local communities, and individuals within their 
value and supply chains. 

Many factors make up social responsibility, and the GSI sees the following as most critical to ensuring 
inclusive social stability and growth within the salmon farming industry: 

Decent work for all

Access to quality education 

Thriving communities

Good health and wellbeing

Healthy environments

Source: Los Fiordos, Chile



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
4140

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
41

DECENT WORK FOR ALL

Providing jobs and supporting the careers of thousands of people across the world.

GSI: SUPPORTING THRIVING COMMUNITIES 

24,000
Employing over

full-time employees35—and many 
more across the value chain

Providing work experience, 
internships and mentoring  

to young people

Providing opportunities and 
support for local entrepreneurs

Providing equipment, resources 
and training to local industries

Australis Seafoods S.A., Chile

Multi-export Foods, Chile

Cermac, Canada Cermac, Norway

ACCESS TO QUALITY EDUCATION

Supporting the education of local children is a priority for many GSI members. The support provided 
by GSI members has substantial impacts because it is run in small and remote communities.

IMPROVING AND CONTRIBUTING TO EDUCATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE

Cermaq, Canada

Blumar Seafoods, Chile

Tassal, Australia

Running educational  
programs in schools

Offering educational 
scholarships and grants 

to local children

Developing skills and 
training adults and 

young adults 

Providing transport, 
equipment, advice and 
resources for schools 

in need

Funding research  
and development

AquaChile, Chile

40
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
4342

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
43

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

THRIVING COMMUNITIES
FOSTERING TRUSTED RELATIONSHIPS WITH COMMUNITIES 

Opening our doors to 
local communities to learn 

about salmon farming

Engaging with and 
supporting indigenous 

communities 

Organizing community 
events and projects 

Holding community 
consultation sessions to 
answer and learn from 
community members

Implementing changes 
to business practice  

in response to  
community feedback 

GOOD HEALTH AND WELLBEING

Bringing doctors and 
medical supplies to local 

communities in need

Contributing time 
and resources to local 
causes and charities

Conducting medical 
screenings in remote 

communities 

Organizing community 
sports events and 

summer camps  
for children 

Donating salmon and other 
food to local food banks 

and people in need 

PROMOTING HEALTHY COMMUNITIES AND PEOPLE

Nova Sea, Norway

Salmones Camanchaca Cermaq, Chile Tassal, Australia Bakkafrost

New Zealand King Salmon, New Zealand 

43



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
44

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
45

HEALTHY ENVIRONMENTS

Monitoring impacts of 
salmon farming on  
local ecosystems 

Implementing environmental 
infrastructure within  

schools and communities,  
including recycling

Regular hosting and 
participation in beach 

clean-ups around the world
Initiating and collaborating 

on projects to enhance 
local biodiversity

PROTECTING NATURE AND SUPPORTING ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY

44
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

Bakkafrost, Faroe Islands Grieg Seafood ASA, Canada Grieg Seafood, Shetland

Source: Australis, Chile



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
4746

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

Trust as a cornerstone for social responsibility
Trust is vital in all aspects of social responsibility. Without trust, it would be impossible to support our 
employees, partners and community members. For GSI, responsibility is built through trust, transparency 
and accountability.

Transparency is one of the GSI’s guiding principles: each GSI member transparently reports on 
social performance via the annual industry-wide GSI Sustainability Report. More details on the GSI 
Sustainability Report and environmental performance can be found on page 15.

Within the annual GSI Sustainability Reports, members share details and data on a variety of social 
indicators. The GSI has chosen to use ASC certification as our reference point for progress in our 
sustainability performance. In the report we track the number of farms currently certified, those 
undergoing certification, and the number of tons certified.

1 DIRECT LABOR
GSI member operations cover many regions, and their employees are a 
diverse group, in terms of both culture and areas of work. Nevertheless, all of 
our members share a common set of core values that promote fair treatment 
and safe working conditions for all employees across all their operations.

2 COMPLIANCE
Salmon farming is a highly regulated industry and all companies must act 
in accordance with local laws and regulations. GSI members report on their 
adherence to these regulations. 

3 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Health and safety performance is a key measure of a company’s duty of care, and 
GSI members aim to ensure the highest levels of occupational health and safety 
for all employees.

4 R&D INVESTMENT
GSI members recognize the importance of investing in R&D as an opportunity 
to foster innovation and expand knowledge and tools to help to improve our 
farming operations, reduce possible operational risks and ensure continuous 
progress towards sustainable salmon farming.

5 COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
GSI’s local operations actively engage with local communities and stakeholders 
to ensure we act as responsible corporate citizens and support development 
of the communities in which we operate. 

“The work of the GSI is powered by the people 
within it. From our member’s leadership, to R&D 
teams, fish health experts, feed specialists, and of 
course the farmers; it is their work which is shaping 
the future of the industry. Social responsibility is 
therefore a priority to our members, who continue 
to respect the values, health and wellbeing, and the 
rights of their employees and the communities in 
which they operate.”

-Sophie Ryan, Chief Executive Officer, GSI

Source: Cermaq



49
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

4948
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

GSI Model
PRE-COMPETITIVE COLLABORATION 
Business as usual is no longer an option. Our food systems are under threat and need drastic change. 
Working independently or on a smaller scale may address some challenges but it will not deliver significant 
change or address the challenges at the speed our food system requires.

Within the GSI, we have identified several key areas where we believe we can have greater impact by 
working together—at scale, and at a faster rate—than working individually. 

Aquaculture is one of fastest growing food-producing sectors on the planet, and although farmed fish is 
widely recognized as a healthy, resource-efficient protein, it must be managed responsibly as the industry 
grows to ensure it remains a sustainable option.

To achieve a vision of providing 
a healthy protein with minimal 
environmental impact, collaboration 
is required to drive change. 

“The good news is that we can get change at speed and scale 
if we find out how to adopt a model of private sector-driven 
creative innovation, using pre-competitive collaboration 
and basing it on high ambition and transparency”  
-Avrim Lazar, GSI Convenor

Achieving 100% ASC certification 

Improving sustainable sourcing of  
feed ingredients

Biosecurity and fish welfare

Transparency

Our main objective is to produce healthy fish 
in healthy waters and as farmers of the sea, we 
share our waters, which is why we believe it makes 
sense for us to cooperate and work together on 
biosecurity management.

We know that as an industry, we are not perfect and 
we face challenges, but by collaborating, we can bring 
together the shared expertise and experiences we 
have to problem-solve and innovate to improve the 
salmon farming industry’s sustainability performance.

Source: Shutterstock



Transparency 
One of the ways the GSI is ensuring responsible growth for the 
salmon farming industry is to improve the level of transparency. 
As part of the GSI’s commitment to sustainability, we release our 
annual Sustainability Report, which provides key sustainability data 
across all GSI member companies in all regions. Transparency is not 
only crucial in demonstrating measurable progress in improving our 
environmental performance, but also in holding us as GSI members 
accountable to our sustainability commitments. Most importantly, 
it also highlights where further progress can be made. We use our 
report not to show our successes, but our work-in-progress.

Innovation 
Finding the solutions to solve the global food crisis is not beyond 
our capabilities. We know we are capable of finding solutions 
through innovation and collective problem-solving. The issue is not 
working out what to do, but how can we find the solutions that are 
going to create significant, long-term change with the critical mass 
of change that is needed. Moving beyond individual solutions or 
top performers is key. If the majority of food production does not 
change and operate in a sustainable way, then the “good projects” 
are just an exercise in vanity and will not deliver the results required.

VALUE CHAIN COLLABORATION  
AND OUR ASSOCIATE MEMBERS
The environmental performance of the farmed salmon sector  
is highly dependent on collaboration with our supply chain.  
From feed ingredients to the medicines required to support optimal 
fish welfare—in order to really assess and improve our performance, 
it was critical we engaged the support and engagement of the two 
interconnected sectors: feed and pharmaceuticals. 

For GSI Associate Member organizations, this means working 
together in ways that support the shared interest in the growth 
and prosperity of the salmon farming industry, as well as a shared 
commitment to improving the sustainability of the sector. With their 
engagement we are better positioned to address the challenges, 
and work together to find practical solutions, and invest in 
necessary R&D and new innovations.

OUR ASSOCIATE MEMBER PARTNERS
Benchmark, BioMar Group, Cargill, Elanco, MSD, Pharmaq, 
Salmofood, Skretting

Source: iStock
50



53
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

52
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

53

How responsible aquaculture targets 
seven of the SDGs 
The SDGs are a universal call to action to end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure that  
all people enjoy peace and prosperity, established by the UN as part of its 2030 agenda for  
Sustainable Development. 

Responsible aquaculture has the ability to support many of the UN’s SDGs and can directly affect and 
impact seven of the 17 SDGs. We are committed to supporting the implementation of the following goals:

GOAL 2 Zero Hunger: The GSI is part of a drive to accelerate improvements in industry sustainability 
and future food security. 

GOAL 8 Decent Work and Economic Growth: aquaculture and specifically salmon farming is a key 
contributor to sustainable economic growth, providing skilled employment in some of our most fragile 
and remote rural and coastal communities.

GOAL 9 Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure: Through our commitment to achieving the ASC Salmon 
Standard, we can drive the transformative change needed to ensure aquaculture is, and continues to 
be, a responsible and sustainable production system with minimal environmental impact.

GOAL 12 Responsible Consumption and Production: responsibility is at the heart of the GSI vision for 
the sustainable future of aquaculture.

GOAL 13 Climate Action: aquaculture has many benefits over agriculture and meat production in terms 
of its environmental performance; for example, less demand on arable land, low emissions of CO2, low 
and efficient use of fresh water.

GOAL 14 Life Below: the GSI is driving the farmed salmon sector towards continuous improvement 
in sustainability, implementing real and measurable change to support the future biodiversity of our 
oceans, and to help safeguard the planet.

GOAL 17 Partnerships to achieve the goal: the GSI model of pre-competitive collaboration supports 
this SDG by driving innovation through continued partnerships and sharing of expertise and supporting 
knowledge transfer to other sectors.

Working collaboratively  
offers many benefits 

SCALE More than half of the salmon produced 
globally is by companies enrolled in the 
GSI. This means 50% of global production is 
linked to our theory of change and belief in 
continuous improvements in environmental 
performance.

AMBITION With 50% of the industry 
engaged, we can set ambitious sustainability 
targets and create a significant shift in 
industry environmental performance, in  
which we are motivated to go further than  
if working individually. 

CAPACITY The GSI is CEO-driven and each 
company has technical representation in each 
of our task forces. Once a decision is made, we 
have the power and capacity to implement it.

COMMUNITY The GSI works as a collective, 
and by working together as companies and 
with the wider value chain, we can inspire 
solutions and hold each other accountable. 
The pre-competitive sharing of technology 
allows us to not compete on environmental 
performance, but rather share and teach 
best practice, which enables sector-wide 
improvements.

TRUTH In order to facilitate real progress, 
we publish data for 14 key environmental 
and social indicators once a year through our 
Sustainability Report. Transparency holds us 
accountable to ourselves, each other and our 
stakeholders, and it allows us to benchmark 
our progress.

RESULTS By setting clear objectives and 
working on key issues as a collective, we are 
able to show real, measurable change. In 2013 
there was no ASC-certified farmed salmon; 
now, 65%* of GSI production is certified.

=

Source: Shutterstock

* Figure as of end of 2019



Partnering with like-minded  
organizations and initiatives 
HIGH LEVEL PANEL FOR A SUSTAINABLE 
OCEAN ECONOMY

The High Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean 
Economy brings together world leaders who 
recognize that economic production and ocean 
protection must be mutually supporting if we 
are to “produce, protect and prosper.” It is 
an initiative of serving heads of government 
committed to catalyzing bold, pragmatic 
solutions for ocean health and wealth that 
support the SDGs and build a better future  
for people and the planet. It is the High Level  
Panel’s ambition that the innovative solutions  
and actions stemming from its work will drive  
the ocean agenda well beyond 2020.36 

The Panel is supported by an Advisory Network 
that will act as advisors, reviewing the panel’s 
recommendations, informing and socializing 
stakeholders, catalyzing innovations and 

solutions and scale actions through strategic 
alliances and partnerships. GSI is pleased to have 
been invited to join the Advisory Network to the 
High Level Panel, and be presented as a case 
study for industry models for change. 

The mission of the High Level Panel is closely 
aligned with our GSI model and way of working. 
It is ingrained in our philosophy that, by working 
together, we can have a greater impact in 
improving our environmental performance and 
protecting the long-term sustainability of the 
oceans. By working with similar initiatives, we can 
bring together shared expertise and experiences 
to problem-solve and identify ways to innovate 
and improve.

Source: iStock

BLUE FOOD COALITION  
 
The GSI is pleased to support the Friends of 
Ocean Action in their Blue Food Coalition, to 
mobilize action and advance progress on the 
role of the ocean and other aquatic sources  
in adequately, safely and sustainably feeding  
the planet.

UN GLOBAL COMPACT FOR SUSTAINABLE 
OCEAN BUSINESS

The GSI is engaged in the Global Compact 
initiative, supporting the development of a 
‘framework for leadership for the Global Goals 
and the Ocean’. Acknowledging that to achieve 
the ambitions outlined in the SDGs, there will 
be a need to expand the use of the oceans to 
produce food, energy and raw materials, and by 
doing so in a sustainable manner it will contribute 
to reduced global warming and environmental 
degradation. Through the Global Compact the 
aim is to establish the correct guidance to 
ensure the ocean can be used as a resource, 
while protecting ocean health.

RESPONSIBLE SOURCING 

The responsible sourcing of resources is 
incredibly important to GSI. Our members are 
at the forefront of ensuring responsible practices 
and are active in many working groups to support 
sustainable progress. Further examples of this 
include active participation in the Roundtable on 
Sustainable Palm Oil, setting up marine protected 
areas in the Antarctic, and supporting the 
acceleration of novel sources through our own 
tender for EPA&DHA rich non-marine sources, 
and the FeedX Project.

Responsible sourcing of soy—as an ingredient in 
salmon feed, it is part of our mandate to support 
and ensure the responsible sourcing of soy. 
GSI, and our members, work with a number of 
key stakeholders to improve soy sustainability, 
protect biodiversity and establish certified supply 
chains to meet demand for responsibly produced 
soy. These include—supporting the Amazon Soy 
Moratorium, Cerrado Manifesto, and the Cerrado 
Working Group.

54



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
57

This vision sets out the four pathways we see as being integral to our success in ensuring the long-term 
sustainability of the industry, and supporting the sector in meeting its potential in providing a healthy 
and sustainable protein with low environmental impact.

GSI Pathways to the Future

COLLABORATION

TRANSPARENCY

RESPONSIBILITY

INNOVATION

As salmon farmers, we know there are things that 
we cannot control, but what we can control is 
ensuring we make the most of the resources and 
expertise we have. This approach will best prepare 
us for the long term and set ourselves up to have 
the greatest chance of creating a future industry 
that is not only environmentally sustainable, but 
also socially and economically sustainable.

Our Pathways framework is a guide for our 
activities and ensures we continue to head in the 
right direction. By keeping these four principles—
collaboration, transparency, responsibility and 
innovation—at the core of our operations, we hope 
to position ourselves in the best way to support 
significant sustainable growth for the long-term 
success of the aquaculture industry.

In 2018, the GSI established its 
vision for the future of aquaculture 
framework. 

It is possible to close the 
food gap and to minimize 
the stress added to the 
world’s resources, but we 
must challenge ourselves 
to act responsibly, promote 
knowledge exchange 
to accelerate solutions, 
collaborate, and innovate.

Source: BakkaFrost



59
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD

5958
SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOODSource: Benchmark

ASC – Aquaculture Stewardship Council

DHA – Docosahexaenoic Acid

EPA – Eicosapentaenoic Acid

FAO – Food and Agriculture Organization 

FCR – Food Conversion Ratio 

FFDR – Forage Fish Dependency Ratio

GSI – Global Salmon Initiative

R&D – Research and Development

SDG – Sustainable Development Goal

UN – United Nations



SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
60

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
61

1World Resources Institute. Creating A Sustainable Food Future. July 2019. Available at: 
https://wrr-food.wri.org/sites/default/files/2019-07/WRR_Food_Full_Report_0.pdf  
Last accessed October 2019. 

2United Nations. Global Goals, Ocean Opportunity. 2019. Available at:  
https://www.unglobalcompact.org/library/5711 Last accessed October 2019

3Food and Agriculture Organization. The State of the World Fisheries and Aquaculture. 
2018. Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/I9540EN/i9540en.pdf  
Last accessed October 2019. 

4Commonwealth Secretariat. The Commonwealth Blue Charter. Available at:  
https://bluecharter.thecommonwealth.org/ Last accessed October 2019. 

5Save the Sea. Interesting Ocean Facts. Available at:  
http://savethesea.org/STS%20ocean_facts.htm Last accessed October 2019. 

6World Wildlife Fund. Industries: Sustainable Seafood. Available at:  
https://www.worldwildlife.org/industries/sustainable-seafood Last accessed October 2019. 

7Ocean Panel. About the Ocean. Available at: https://www.oceanpanel.org/about-the-ocean 
Last accessed October 2019. 

8World Wildlife Fund. Ocean assets valued at $24 trillion but dwindling fast. Available at: 
https://www.worldwildlife.org/stories/ocean-assets-valued-at-24-trillion-but-dwindling-fast 
Last accessed October 2019.

9Food and Agriculture Organization. Impacts of climate change on fisheries and 
aquaculture. 2018. Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/i9705en/i9705en.pdf 
Last accessed October 2019.

10The World Bank. Raising more fish to meet rising demand. February 2014. Available at: 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2014/02/05/raising-more-fish-to-meet-rising-
demand Last accessed October 2019.

11The ASC. Salmon. Available at: https://www.asc-aqua.org/what-we-do/our-standards/
farm-standards/the-salmon-standard/ Last accessed October 2019.

12National Geographic. Effects of global warming. Available at: https://www.
nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/global-warming-effects/  
Last accessed October 2019.

Source: BakkaFrost

https://wrr-food.wri.org/sites/default/files/2019-07/WRR_Food_Full_Report_0.pdf
https://www.unglobalcompact.org/library/5711. Last accessed October 2019
http://www.fao.org/3/I9540EN/i9540en.pdf
https://bluecharter.thecommonwealth.org/
http://savethesea.org/STS%20ocean_facts.htm
https://www.worldwildlife.org/industries/sustainable-seafood
https://www.oceanpanel.org/about-the-ocean
https://www.worldwildlife.org/stories/ocean-assets-valued-at-24-trillion-but-dwindling-fast
http://www.fao.org/3/i9705en/i9705en.pdf
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2014/02/05/raising-more-fish-to-meet-rising-demand
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2014/02/05/raising-more-fish-to-meet-rising-demand
https://www.asc-aqua.org/what-we-do/our-standards/farm-standards/the-salmon-standard/
https://www.asc-aqua.org/what-we-do/our-standards/farm-standards/the-salmon-standard/
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/global-warming-effects/
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/global-warming-effects/


SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
62

SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
63

13TIME. Climate change is likely to devastate the global food supply. But there’s still reason 
to be hopeful. August 2019. Available at: https://time.com/5663621/climate-change-food-
supply/ Last accessed October 2019.

14OECD. Meeting of Agricultural Ministers background note. 2016.  
Available at: https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/ministerial/background/notes/4_
background_note.pdf Last accessed October 2019.

15Food and Agriculture Organization. Tackling Climate Change Through Livestock. 2013. 
Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3437e.pdf Last accessed October 2019.

16OECD. Climate change and food systems. Available at: https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/
topics/climate-change-and-food-systems/ Last accessed October 2019.

17Froehlich H et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2018;115(20):5295–5300. 

18Yale Climate Connections. The right seafood choices help fight climate change. May 2019. 
Available at: https://www.yaleclimateconnections.org/2019/05/the-right-seafood-choices-
help-fight-climate-change/ Last accessed October 2019.

19World Health Organization. Assessing the economic costs of unhealthy diets and 
low physical activity. 2017. Available at: http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0004/342166/Unhealthy-Diets-ePDF-v1.pdf Last accessed October 2019.

20World Health Organization. 10 facts on noncommunicable diseases. March 2013.  
Available at: https://www.who.int/features/factfiles/noncommunicable_diseases/en/  
Last accessed October 2019. 

21USDA and USDHHS. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2015-2020.  
Available at: https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/resources/2015-2020_Dietary_
Guidelines.pdf Last accessed October 2019.

22Public Health England. The Eat Well Guide. 2018. Available at: https://assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/742750/
Eatwell_Guide_booklet_2018v4.pdf Last accessed October 2019.

23Harvard T.H. Chan. The nutrition source. Available at: https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/
nutritionsource/what-should-you-eat/protein/ Last accessed October 2019. 

24U.S. Department Of Agriculture. FoodData Central: Salmon.  
Available at: https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/fdc-app.html#/food-details/337751/nutrients  
Last accessed October 2019. 

25Self Nutrition Data. Fish, salmon, Atlantic, farmed cooked, dry heat nutrition facts & calories. 
Available at: https://nutritiondata.self.com/facts/finfish-and-shellfish-products/4259/2 Last 
accessed October 2019.

26Weichselbaum E et al. Nutr Bull 2013;38(2):128–177.

27Schwellenbach LJ et al. J Am Coll Nutr 2006;25(6):480–485.

28Innes J.K and Calder P.C Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020;21, 1362.

29U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Summary of qualified health claims subject to 
enforcement discretion. 2014. Available at: https://regulatorydoctor.us/wp-content/
uploads/2014/09/Summary-of-Qualified-Health-Claims-Subject-to-Enforcement-Discretion.
pdf Last Accessed October 2019.

30Hibbeln JR et al. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2019;151:14–36.

31Pusceddu M.M et al. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology 2016; 19(12): 1-23.

32Akbar U et al. JCR: Journal of Clinical Rheumatology 2017 23;(6): 330-339.

33Black LJ et al. Nutrients 2017;9(2):E136.

34Purvis B et al. Sustain Sci 2019;14(3):681–695. 

35The Global Salmon Initiative. Sustainability Report.  
Available at: https://globalsalmoninitiative.org/en/sustainability-report/sustainability-
indicators/ Last accessed October 2019.

36Ocean Panel. High Level Panel (HLP) for a Sustainable Ocean Economy.  
Available at: https://oceanpanel.org/ Last accessed October 2019.

https://time.com/5663621/climate-change-food-supply/
https://time.com/5663621/climate-change-food-supply/
https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/ministerial/background/notes/4_background_note.pdf
https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/ministerial/background/notes/4_background_note.pdf
http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3437e.pdf 
https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/topics/climate-change-and-food-systems/
https://www.oecd.org/agriculture/topics/climate-change-and-food-systems/
https://www.yaleclimateconnections.org/2019/05/the-right-seafood-choices-help-fight-climate-change/
https://www.yaleclimateconnections.org/2019/05/the-right-seafood-choices-help-fight-climate-change/
http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/342166/Unhealthy-Diets-ePDF-v1.pdf?ua=1 
http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/342166/Unhealthy-Diets-ePDF-v1.pdf?ua=1 
https://www.who.int/features/factfiles/noncommunicable_diseases/en/
https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/resources/2015-2020_Dietary_Guidelines.pdf
https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/resources/2015-2020_Dietary_Guidelines.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/742750/Eatwell_Guide_booklet_2018v4.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/742750/Eatwell_Guide_booklet_2018v4.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/742750/Eatwell_Guide_booklet_2018v4.pdf
https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/what-should-you-eat/protein/
https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/what-should-you-eat/protein/
https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/fdc-app.html#/food-details/337751/nutrients
https://nutritiondata.self.com/facts/finfish-and-shellfish-products/4259/2
https://regulatorydoctor.us/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Summary-of-Qualified-Health-Claims-Subject-to-Enforcement-Discretion.pdf
https://regulatorydoctor.us/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Summary-of-Qualified-Health-Claims-Subject-to-Enforcement-Discretion.pdf
https://regulatorydoctor.us/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Summary-of-Qualified-Health-Claims-Subject-to-Enforcement-Discretion.pdf
https://globalsalmoninitiative.org/en/sustainability-report/sustainability-indicators/
https://globalsalmoninitiative.org/en/sustainability-report/sustainability-indicators/
https://oceanpanel.org/


SUSTAINABLE SALMON FARMING: THE FUTURE OF FOOD
64

Source: iStock


