















































Home to Us All 
How Connecting with Nature Helps Us Care 
for Ourselves and the Earth 

November 
2018 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 1 

Dedication 
This publication is dedicated to the children of the Earth, their brothers and sisters of all species, 
and the Home that supports all of Life. We offer these words and images with humility and 
gratitude for the spirits and elders who precede us, and with hope for vision, guidance, and 
responsible actions to contribute to a healthy future for all for generations to come. 

How to Use this Publication 
Home to Us All: How Connecting with Nature Helps Us Care for Ourselves and the Earth is 
intended for a variety of people and purposes. Feel free to use its contents, with attribution to 
the source. You may use it in its entirety, or excerpt parts of it, noting “Reprinted with 
permission from the Children & Nature Network, ©2018.” In addition to this full publication, 
there are other resources, including a summary titled Connecting with Nature to Care for 
Ourselves and the Earth: Recommendations for Decision Makers available from 
www.childrenandnature.org and www.natureforall.global. 

All photos by Bob Samples; except 
page 38, image by Joe Baust. 

http://www.childrenandnature.org/
http://www.natureforall.global/


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 2 

Table of Contents 

4 

6 

7 

9 

19 
35 
38 
45 
46 
49 

Executive Summary 

Welcome and Background 

Introduction 

What’s the Problem? 

What Do We Know? 

What Don’t We Know? 

What Can We Do? 

A Call for Inspired Action 

Appendix 1: Education and Society 

Appendix 2: Policies and Practices 

References 55 



Authors: Cheryl Charles, Karen Keenleyside, 
Rosalie Chapple, Bill Kilburn, Pascale Salah van 
der Leest, Diana Allen, Miles Richardson, 
Matteo Giusti, Lawrence Franklin, Michael 
Harbrow, Ruth Wilson, Andrew Moss, Louise 
Metcalf, Luis Camargo. 

Oversight and Review: Karen Keenleyside, 
Pascale Salah van der Leest, Katalin 
Czippan, Tony Varcoe, Chantal Elkin, Kedar 
Gore, David Ainsworth, Diana Allen, Erica 
Thompson, Karen Shelstad, Kathyrn 
Campbell, Stacie Beute, Stephanie 
Sanderson, Thea Silver, Kathy McKinnon, 
Sean Southey. 

Additional Reviewers: Louise Chawla, Matthew 
Zylstra, Lisa Nisbet, Dawn Carr, Milton McClaren, 
Cathy Jordan, Chloe Dragon Smith, Keith 
Wheeler, Janani Eswar, Nicole de Paula, Krisma 
Moore, Louise Zimanyi, Paula Benjamin, James 
MacDiarmid, Devon Hamilton, Charlotte Weider, 
Kathy MacKinnon, Nancy Colleton, Cath Prisk, 
Dominique Potuin, Isaiah Dambudzo 
Nyakusendwa, Intisar Elteraifi, Nigel Dudley, 
Nicola Pritchett, Jose B. R. Brilha, Satya Prakash 
Mehra, Nouhad Awwad, Sofia Dalampira, Maria 
E. Auma, Daniel Maembe, Beatriz Padilla, Valerie 
Petrone Mendoza, Maulidi Hamisi Mwinyikai, 
Jyotirmoy Shankar Deb, Biswajit De, Ana Valeri 
Mandri Rohen, Stephanie Sirois, Joseph Sarvary, 
Shaju Thomas, Beverly Winterscheid, Sena 
Alouka, Christine Nyangweso, Lais Fleury, Maria 
Isabel Amando de Barros, Shauna Jones, Peter 
Paul van Kempen.

Additional Reviewing Organisations: 
Alana Institute 
AMAF BENIN 
Australian Research Institute for Environment 
and Sustainability (ARIES) 
BLI 
Brandwein Institute 
Kishoka Youth Organization 
National Commission for Protected Areas of 
Mexico 
Play Futures Exploration 6 
Shouf Biosphere Reserve 
Tinta Vital 

© 2018 Children & Nature Network 3 

Home to Us All: How 
Connecting with Nature 
Helps Us Care for 
Ourselves and the Earth 

Supporting Organisations: 
#NatureForAll, an Initiative of the International Union 
for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN); 
IUCN Commission on Education and Communication 
(CEC); Parks Canada; Ontario Trillium Foundation; 
Children & Nature Network. 

Additional Contributors: 
• Alliance of Religions and Conservation (UK)
• Back to Nature Network (Canada)
• Blue Mountains World Heritage Institute (Australia)
• Chester Zoo (UK)
• Department of Conservation (New Zealand)
• Nature Conservancy of Canada (Canada)
• New South Wales National Parks and Wildlife Service

(Australia)
• Parks Victoria (Australia)
• Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity

(Canada/Global)
• US National Park Service (USA)
• World Association of Zoos and Aquariums (UK/Global)

HOME TO US ALL 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 4 

This report, Home to Us All: How Connecting with Nature Helps Us Care for Ourselves and the Earth, 
presents the growing body of evidence that people’s relationship with nature profoundly influences 
their behaviours toward the Earth. At a time when the world is confronted with growing environmental 
threats, better understanding the critical connection between people and nature is key to informing 
effective decision making, stimulating positive action, and optimizing the benefits people and 
communities receive from nature. 

Spending time in nature is good for us—for our children’s development, our overall health and well- 
being, the vitality of our communities, and for economic sectors. When people experience and connect 
with nature they are also more likely to act in ways that benefit the Earth. Therefore, as this report 
indicates, the importance of meaningful personal connections with nature should be considered and 
integrated, along with scientific knowledge, into public policies related to the environment and 
sustainable development. 

Home to Us All is unique in that it synthesizes evidence derived from Indigenous and ancient wisdom, 
contemporary science, academic research, and current practice to reveal several important findings: 

• Positive, direct experiences in nature during childhood and role models of care for
nature by someone close to the child are the two factors that contribute most to
individuals choosing to take action to benefit the environment as adults.

• People of all ages who participate in nature-based activities tend to be happier and
healthier than those who do not.

• Social experiences in nature foster connectedness to each other and to nature.
• People who develop a sense of place are more likely to want to protect it and to oppose

the degradation of the environment.
• Knowledge is very important but is not enough on its own to cause people to take action

to benefit nature.
• Meaningful, positive experience in nature is a powerful way of developing a connection

with, or love of, nature that can in turn guide people toward care for the Earth.
• Connectedness to nature is a strong predictor of positive conservation behaviour.

By establishing a focus on fostering human connectedness with nature in policies and practices across 
diverse sectors, we have the opportunity to improve the human condition and that of the Earth itself. 

Initiatives that embody the following characteristics are particularly encouraged: 
• Education and child care policies that enable time outdoors in nature and experiential

learning about nature in early childhood and throughout life;
• Health and elder care policies that deliver the health benefits of contact with nature for

all people of all ages;

Executive Summary 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 5 

• Community planning and urban development policies to create nature-rich cities that
include parks and protected areas for the benefit of people and nature;

• Parks, outdoor recreation, and tourism policies that encourage family-friendly
experiences, interpretive programmes, and outdoor, nature-based and experiential
education;

• Arts and culture policies that promote the integration of culture and nature to develop a
sense of oneness with nature while celebrating stories of connection and healing;

• Policies that encourage private sector investment in environmentally sustainable
programming, infrastructure, and innovative solutions, such as technology, for
connecting people with nature; and

• Policies that call for biodiversity conservation organisations to work across sectors so
that all people, equitably and inclusively, experience the diverse benefits of
connectedness with nature.

Additional guidelines for practice: 
• Use a variety of tools, including social media and community-based social marketing, to

encourage those with high levels of connectedness to communicate and share their
values and experiences with others, including children and youth, and to engage those
not yet connected with nature.

• Allow for immersion and frequent experiences of caring for nature to encourage the 
growth of perceived efficacy, knowledge, connection and commitment over  time.

• Prepare people of all ages to transfer their learnings about responsible environmental
practices from their experiences in what may be distant settings, such as field trips and
wilderness adventures, to their everyday lives at home.

• Recognise that people hold a variety of values related to nature, so design and
implement policies and practices that will resonate with those values.

• Help people do what they already do, such as having a social gathering or a meeting, but
do it outdoors.

• Make it easy, make it social, and make it fun for people to connect with nature.

The evidence is clear. One of the most important things that any of us can do for ourselves, those we 
love, people throughout the world, and the living systems that support us all is to connect with nature. 
That connection can start in the simplest of ways, beginning in childhood and renewing through all the 
stages of life. It can take many forms, and occur in many ways. It requires places and spaces for people 
to connect with nature’s richness and complexity from backyards to apartment rooftops, on city streets 
and rural roadways, on school grounds and in urban neighborhoods, from wild protected areas to urban 
parks. Connecting with nature helps to bring us all peace and good health, and provides the foundation 
for resilient, healthy ecosystems, communities, and economies to thrive and remain for generations and 
generations to come. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 6 

Dear Colleagues, 

For humans to thrive in harmony with nature, we need to understand the importance of integrating it into our lives. However, 
while many of us experience, benefit from, and care for nature, others face barriers to experiencing and connecting with it. In 
an effort to make nature a part of the lives of all people from all walks of life and, in doing so, create increased support and 
action for conservation globally, the IUCN World Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA) and IUCN Commission on Education 
and Communication (CEC) jointly launched #NatureForAll in 2016. 

#NatureForAll is a global movement to inspire love of nature with, as of October 2018, nearly 30 partner organizations from 
more than 60 countries. 

#NatureForAll partners are showing how personal experiences and connections with nature provide powerful benefits for 
individual and societal health, well-being, and resilience, and are the foundation of a lifelong support for nature conservation. 
They are coming together as a coalition to share actions, collaborate, and amplify their collective reach to engage new 
audiences to connect with, and fall in love with, nature—and ignite action. As an important part of their work, they are 
accessing and generating knowledge about the value of experiences in nature and its links to positive attitudes and behaviours 
toward the Earth. This knowledge has a vital role to play in informing local, regional, and global policy and action on 
conservation and related issues. 

The evidence supporting the link between human relationships with the rest of nature and actions that support positive 
conservation behaviour is rapidly growing. That knowledge base, with its specific focus on what leads to care for the Earth, is 
synthesized in this document. The health, education, economic, social and cultural benefits for humans through their 
connections with nature are increasingly understood. What is equally of interest are opportunities to foster connections with 
nature in ways that not only serve people, but, reciprocally and interactively, foster actions to care for the living systems and 
non-human inhabitants of our planet.  Home to Us All: How Connecting with Nature Helps Us Care for Ourselves and the 
Earth provides the evidence for an urgently needed guide to action. 

Sean Southey, Co-Chair, #NatureForAll
Chair, IUCN Commission on Education and Communication

Welcome and Background 

Karen Keenleyside, Co-Chair, #NatureForAll
Vice Chair for People and Parks, 
IUCN World Commission on Protected Areas 
Vice Chair for #NatureForAll, 
IUCN Commission on Education and Communication 

https://www.natureforall.global/


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 7 

“The care of rivers is not a question of rivers, but of the human heart.” 

Tanaka Shozo, Japanese conservationist, 19th Century 

Home to Us All: How Connecting with Nature Helps Us Care for Ourselves and the Earth presents the growing body of evidence 
that people's relationship with nature profoundly influences their behaviours toward the Earth. 

This report was born from the questions, “What leads people to take action to care for the environment, the Earth that 
supports us all? What does the evidence say—from Indigenous and local wisdom to peer-reviewed scholarly studies?” 

The results are compelling. For many people, caring for nature is a result of connecting with it. This can happen in a 
combination of ways—emotionally, physically, intellectually, sometimes spiritually and most often, through direct experience. 

This report was initiated as a part of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature’s #NatureForAll initiative. Its overall 
purpose is to advance #NatureForAll and inform policy development for biodiversity conservation and other sectors by 
synthesizing and making available the evidence that links experiences in nature with positive conservation attitudes and 
behaviours and the nurturing of sustainable development. It includes academic research and anecdotal information, as well as 
Indigenous and local knowledge. Not designed or intended to be a formal literature review, it is a compilation and synthesis of 
evidence to assist in advocating for the importance of connecting people with nature. Summarizing the evidence that links 
human-nature connectedness with conservation and sustainable development outcomes was a key focus. Where relevant, 
evidence related to health, education, and other benefits of connectedness with nature was referenced. This work was not 
intended to duplicate other syntheses, especially those related to health and education outcomes. 

The Children & Nature Network (C&NN), a core #NatureForAll partner, focuses on connecting children, their families and 
communities with nature. C&NN’s vision is a world in which all children play, learn and grow with nature in their everyday lives. 
Its mission is to lead a global movement to increase equitable access to nature so that children–and natural places–can thrive. 
C&NN fulfills this mission by investing in leadership and communities through sharing evidence-based resources, scaling 
innovative solutions, and driving policy change. Among other things, it curates and houses the most extensive collection of 
peer-reviewed research studies currently available for connecting children, families and communities with nature. 

The resulting report was developed by a team of 14 authors coordinated by the Children & Nature Network, supported by an 
international oversight team, and reviewed by more than 60 individuals and representatives of organisations from 22 nations 
and five continents. In addition to the full report, which follows in this publication, a shorter summary titled Connecting with 
Nature to Care for Ourselves and the Earth: Recommendations for Decision Makers and additional resources are also available 
at www.childrenandnature.org and http://natureforall.global. 

The report begins with a broad perspective about the importance of people’s and the Earth’s overall health and well-being, at 
a time when there are great risks to both. Most of the document is designed to identify and describe the major evidence- 
based sources of knowledge that can help inform policy and practice for people of varying ages and in varied settings. The 
report does not represent a systematic review of academic research and it does not take a hypothesis-testing approach. 
Rather, it brings together key findings from a range of sources to create a synthesis of the state of knowledge relevant to 
understanding whether and how our relationship with nature influences our tendency to care for the Earth. 

A summary chart of Guiding Principles conveys the major findings from this synthesis of evidence. Based on this analysis and 
other findings, guidelines and recommendations for policy and practice are offered. The appendices include brief descriptions 
of policies, projects, programs, and other resources to serve as examples of actions being taken throughout the world to foster 
the kind of connectedness with nature that the evidence indicates will be most likely to achieve a worldwide culture of 
conservation. 

Introduction 

http://www.childrenandnature.org/
http://natureforall.global/


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 8 

Home to Us All is intended to be comprehensive in addressing what is known about the link between nature-based experiences 
in life, and people’s affinity for and tendency to take action to benefit nature. Most of the evidence to date is correlational, not 
causal. While the patterns tend to be clear, and the overall findings as reported here are substantiated, additional research is 
needed to provide more detailed guidance and direction. 

The report supports the understanding that direct, mostly positive, and meaningful experiences with nature contribute to 
people taking action to benefit the Earth locally, and also more broadly. For older youth and adults, exceptions to the concept 
of positive experiences are where adventure and risk, which may also be challenging and perhaps frightening, correspondingly 
lead to a commitment to care for the Earth. 

Most important, the report makes it clear that conservation actions are developed through connectedness with nature. 
However, throughout the report, related terminology can be confusing. The reader will find references to positive 
conservation behaviours and actions, ecologically responsible behaviour, care for the Earth, pro-environment behaviours and 
similar terms. All are intended to describe people’s actions when they engage deeply and constructively with the rest of 
nature. 

Through the review process, there have been concerns that the report focuses largely on research from developed nations, 
perhaps reflecting a Westernized bias. That is correct to some extent. Nearly all of the peer-reviewed literature is based on 
research from what may be called Westernized nations, where a commitment to economic development, industrialisation, 
and urbanisation tends to dominate. However, there are more voices included. There is research and wisdom from developing 
nations, Indigenous knowledge systems and local communities. In a world where more than half the people live in urban 
settings, and the trend to urbanisation continues, the results have implications for people and ecosystems on all continents. 
At the same time, the voices of those outside of urban settings are heard and reported. 

The first three sections of the report open with Summary Statements identifying the major ideas that will be addressed. 
The text that follows provides citations in support of each of the statements, as well as additional information. The 
citations include literature reviews, reports of primary research, articles, chapters in books and other sources. “What Can 
We Do?” and the concluding “A Call for Inspired Action” are then based on what was learned and reported in the previous 
sections. 

The authors and supporting organisations encourage all readers to share this report’s recommendations with others and help to 
implement them. On behalf of all of those who helped to fulfill the purpose of this project, we also want to hear from you: 
suggestions for improvements, examples of how you have used parts of the publication, progress updates from your own 
communities, innovative and effective practices you have implemented, as well as what you are learning, challenges you are 
experiencing, and stories you can share—all are welcomed. 

With appreciation, 

Cheryl Charles, Ph.D. 
Co-Founder, President and CEO Emerita, Children & Nature Network 
Principal Author and Editor, Home to Us All 
cheryl@childrenandnature.org 

mailto:cheryl@childrenandnature.org


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 9 

What’s the Problem? Why Care? 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 10 

This is a story. It is a story about the relationship between people and the 
living Earth. It is the most urgent, compelling, and inspiring story to be 
shared today. It is a story that will define the kind of planet that future 
generations will inherit and inhabit. 

To help us tell the story, we must remember, learn and act upon the wisdom 
of our elders and knowledge holders. Some of those knowledge holders are 
alive today; others lived long ago. Some draw from the spirit world. Some 
from religions. Some from the sciences and the arts. Some from long- 
standing cultural traditions. Some from literally listening to the Earth, its 
non-living elements, and all its species. 

Some will say this is a prayer. Some will say it is a calling. Some will say that 
they are standing on scientific evidence. All these knowledge holders share 
the view that it is a privilege and a responsibility to be a member of the Earth 
family. 

Why is it so important today, and for the future, to hear this story and share 
it with others? 

Life conditions on Earth are changing more rapidly than ever before in 
recorded history, and not in a positive way. Our planet is experiencing a 
mass extinction that will have cascading consequences for ecosystems and 
human civilization (Ceballos et al., 2017). Species and habitats are being 
transformed. They are disappearing at a rate never before seen as the result 
of increasing pressure from resource consumption, over population, over 
exploitation, habitat loss, spread of invasive species, pollution and climate 
change (Steffen et al., 2015). We need to act rapidly, and with urgency, to 
reverse our present course. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 11 

Many human beings are living with little direct, intentional and conscious 
experience of the beauty and complexity of the Earth’s living systems. The 
realization that humans are just one part of this interdependent and 
interconnected web of life has been forgotten or lost in the memories of 
many. While this disconnect can occur even in rural and undeveloped areas, 
it tends to be exacerbated for people living in cities and heavily urbanized 
areas. Significantly, 55% of the world’s population currently reside in urban 
areas and by 2050, 68% of the world’s population is projected to be urban 
(UN World Urbanisation Prospects, 2017). In Europe, North America and 
East Asia, urbanisation rates typically exceed 75%. If we include Latin 
America in the list of highly urbanised areas, the rate exceeds 80%. Urban 
areas are significant drivers of resource use and environmental change 
globally. This is not to say that urban areas cannot be biologically diverse; 
they can, and are, with care and effort. In fact, urban areas hold great 
potential for connecting people of all ages with nature in their everyday 
lives. This story explains why and how doing so will be good for people, and 
for the planet. 
To ensure human existence on Earth well into the future, it is necessary that 
we maintain and enhance the vitality, vigor and resilience of the Earth’s 
systems. These systems literally produce the basic essentials for all life, 
giving humans the air we breathe, the food we eat, the water we drink, the 
space in which we live and the shelter we seek. So too does the Earth 
provide for wildlife, domesticated animals, and all other life forms. Earth is 
home to us all. We need to act, now. 

Even for those who feel some sense of connection with the living systems 
that support us all, that connection does not always translate into a personal 
commitment to action. There may be a vague sense that the connection is 
being eroded, with a disquieting feeling of loss and powerlessness. It is 
difficult to inspire widespread action through information and awareness 
campaigns alone. To get to action, the heart and hands are typically engaged 
as well. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 12 

While there are some examples of success in stimulating action by raising 
concern and awareness of environmental problems, for the most part, such 
awareness has not led to the sweeping policy actions that are sufficient to 
tackle the issues effectively. 

While it may seem obvious that human health and well-being are 
inextricably linked with the Earth’s living systems, it is accurate to say that, 
as a species, we are not living as if we recognised our interconnectedness. In 
contrast, we are continuing to engage—directly or indirectly—in practices 
that have put the Earth’s life support systems at profound risk. As a result, 
human health and well-being are being demonstrably eroded (World Health 
Organisation, 2017), and the existence of other species and the habitats they 
rely on is being severely and negatively impacted (Butchart et al., 2010; 
IUCN, 2013). 

The underlying essence of this story is that there are systemic crises of health 
and well-being affecting people, wildlife, and ecosystems throughout the 
world. And yet, within the story, there is hope. We humans are capable of 
achieving a new and healthy relationship with nature that embodies a 
regenerative and life-nurturing way of being on Earth. The opportunity 
exists. We have more than enough evidence of the need to act now. Ours 
must be a story—a legacy—of love, not loss, for ourselves and for the Earth 
that is home to us all (Charles, 2015; IUCN, 2011). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 13 

What’s the Problem? Why Care? Summary Statements 

• Life conditions on Earth are changing more rapidly than ever before in recorded history.

• Better understanding the critical connection between people and nature is key to informing
effective decision making, stimulating positive action, and optimizing the benefits people and
communities receive from nature.

• Many human beings are living with little direct experience of the Earth’s living systems.

• Meaningful, positive experience in nature is a powerful way of developing a connection with, or
love of, nature that can in turn guide people toward care for the Earth.

• People need healthy ecological and social environments for their own health and well-being.

• Establishing and maintaining healthy relationships between humans and the Earth’s living
systems is a critical foundation for strong public support and cross-sectoral action to achieve
biodiversity conservation and sustainable development.

• Knowledge is very important but is not enough on its own to cause people to take action to
benefit nature.



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 14 

Why? It’s Time to Heal 

At a time when the world is confronted with growing environmental threats, better 
understanding the critical connection between people and nature is key to informing effective 
decision making, stimulating positive action, and optimizing the benefits people and 
communities receive from nature. 

Spending time in nature is good for us—for our children’s development, our overall health and 
well-being, the vitality of our communities, and our economies. When people experience and 
connect with nature they are also more likely to act in ways that benefit the Earth. However, 
many of us are losing or missing the benefits of direct connections with nature. We need to put 
effective policies and practices in place in order to help people of all ages and walks of life 
overcome barriers to connecting with nature. 

Below, we provide a brief overview, derived from readily-available published studies, of some of 
the important benefits of nature-based experiences for people of all ages. This is followed, both 
in this section, and in the main body of this report, by an expanded discussion of the 
relationship between experiences in nature and the development of the sense of connectedness 
that tends to lead people to take action to care for nature. 

At a personal and societal level the evidence is strong and growing that people tend to be 
happier, healthier, and more productive, creative, active and engaged in community and civic 
life when nature is a meaningful part of their lives (Richardson et al., 2017; Chawla & Litt, 2013; 
Louv, 2012; Charles & Wheeler, 2012; Charles & Senauer, 2010; Kuo, 2010; Louv, 2008). The 
many benefits of connecting with nature start with our children (Charles & Louv, in press). For 
example, infants and toddlers develop healthy resilient bodies from time spent exploring hands- 
on and whole body with natural materials; they are stimulated cognitively and physically by the 
sights and sounds in outdoor spaces. They develop social skills and bond with family members 
through shared experiences in the outdoors (D’Amore, Charles & Louv, 2015; St. Antoine, 
Charles & Louv, 2012). From birth to five years of age, children undergo exceptional rates of 
brain development, which can be stimulated and supported through nature-based experiences. 

School-aged children can build on this foundation through active, outdoor play which has been 
linked to the development of core skills, including problem-solving and reasoning, creativity, 
curiosity, risk-identification, resilience, self-regulation and social and emotional learning 
(Greffrath et al., 2011; Strong et al., 2005; Bingley & Milligan, 2004; Korpela et al., 2002). For 
students, research studies are showing positive associations between the greenness of school 
landscapes and academic performance, such as standardised test scores and rates of graduation 
(Li & Sullivan, 2016; Wu et al., 2014; Matsuoka, 2010). In response to a recent survey conducted 
in 45 countries for the Outdoor Classroom Day initiative, teachers reported that when lessons 
are taken outdoors, children are more engaged in learning (88%), are better able to concentrate 
(68%), and are better behaved (65%) (Project Dirt, 2018). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 15 

Children and adolescents with access to nature also tend to enjoy more physical activity (Barton 
et al., 2014). They benefit from reduced rates of obesity and other chronic diseases, including 
diabetes and heart disease, as well as enhanced emotional well-being and resilience (Chawla, 
2015; Chawla et al., 2014; McCurdy et al., 2010; World Health Organisation, 2004). Research 
indicates that exposure to nature can act as a protective factor for the mental health of young 
people (Piccininni et al., 2018; McCurdy et al., 2010; Louv, 2005). A recent study of 29,784 
Canadian adolescents found that engagement in outdoor play—even as little as a half hour per 
week—was associated with decreased prevalence levels of psychological symptoms in females, 
and decreased psychosomatic symptoms in both males and females (Piccininni et al., 2018). 
Teens also benefit from peer support and grow in self-esteem while working, learning, and 
exploring in groups—particularly enriched by service-oriented projects in the outdoors—that 
develop their confidence and capacity to care for themselves, others and the environment 
(Becker et al., 2017; D’Amore, Charles & Louv, 2015). 

Time spent in nature has an important protective role to play in health and well-being at all 
ages. Following walks in nature or having viewed natural elements, individuals have recorded 
improved blood pressure, pulse rates and stress hormone levels (Gladwell et al., 2013; 
Tsunetsugu et al., 2010; Pretty et al., 2005; Kaplan & Kaplan, 1989). In one study, gardens were 
shown to help Alzheimer’s patients in long-term care facilities remain calm, helping to reduce 
incidents of aggressive behaviours and the related risk and stress for patients and their health 
care providers (Mooney & Nicell, 1992). In another garden-based study, it was found that 
residents in geriatric care who sat in a garden for one hour each day significantly improved on all 
measures of concentration compared to those that stayed in their room (Ottosson & Grahn, 
2005). In our workplaces, as little as looking at nature through a window can decrease stress and 
improve work performance (Kaplan & Kaplan, 1989). 

Evidence is also mounting that proximity to nature may be one of the best predictors of people’s 
physical activity and associated well-being benefits. Adults are demonstrating that exercise 
outdoors in nature not only builds physical strength and agility, but also enhances their sense of 
well-being (Chawla & Litt, 2013; Louv, 2012; Kuo, 2010). Simply walking outdoors has been 
shown to mitigate the severity of depression for individuals, while outdoor activities such as 
gardening and cycling have also been linked to reduced levels of anxiety and depression 
(Peacock et al., 2007; Pretty et al., 2005). Exposure to various forms of nature can lead some 
people to be more generous and caring, helping to bring individuals closer to others (Weinstein 
et al., 2009). At a community level, neighbourhoods with more green space report higher levels 
of resident happiness (Bell et al., 2008). 

Connecting with nature is a potential public health strategy that is accessible and affordable for 
many populations, with research demonstrating not only protective values but restorative 
benefits as well. Positive impacts of nature exposure for adults can include fewer medications, 
faster recovery from surgery and shorter hospital stays (Maller et al., 2005; Ulrich 1984). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 16 

Research studies similarly indicate that time in nature can reduce the need for medication and 
services among mental health patients (Faculty of Public Health, 2010). In addition, the rising 
costs of medication for some conditions such as Attention Disorder Hyperactivity Syndrome 
(ADHD) may be mitigated when time is nature is considered as part of a treatment plan (Faber- 
Taylor & Kuo, 2009; Faber-Taylor et al., 2001; Faculty of Public Health, 2010). Investment in 
nature to promote health and well-being can also return economic benefits. According to one 
study on the cost-benefit analysis of physical activity using bike and pedestrian trails, every $1 
investment in trails for physical activity led to $2.94 in direct medical benefit (Wang et al., 2005). 
Families, taxpayers, employers and governments all bear the growing economic and social 
burden of physical and mental illnesses worldwide. As a starting point, access to nature in 
different shapes and forms is critical for helping people reap the many physical and mental 
benefits of nature connection. 

In a rapidly urbanising world, community green and blue spaces and nearby nature not only 
support a range of health benefits, but can also foster social cohesion. Exposure to various 
forms of nature has been shown to lead some people to be more generous and caring, helping 
to bring individuals closer to others (Weinstein et al., 2009).  Nearby nature, such as urban 
parks, provides the setting for communal activities and contact with neighbours, and can result 
in a greater sense of belonging to community and increased resident satisfaction. Studies have 
demonstrated that urban residents living near natural areas tend to know and respect more of 
their neighbours, and also report higher levels of mutual trust and willingness to help one 
another, compared to their counterparts living in more barren surroundings (Kuo, 2010; Korpela 
et al., 2002; Kuo & Sullivan, 2001; Kuo et al., 1998). Researchers have found that nearby nature 
helps prevent crime and mitigates some of the psychological precursors to aggression and 
violence. A study of 145 public housing residents, for example, showed that those living in 
buildings with views of concrete and asphalt reported more aggression and violence than did 
their counterparts living in identical buildings with views of trees and grass (Kuo, 2010; Kuo & 
Sullivan, 2001). Similarly, evidence suggests that greening remediation programmes of urban 
vacant lots can reduce vandalism as well as gun assaults and violent crimes, including 
aggravated assaults and homicides (Kondo et al., 2016). Urban areas with accessible and quality 
green and blue spaces also benefit from economic spin-offs. Attractive green spaces can 
influence business location decisions, helping to bring new jobs to a community. Studies in 
Canada and the United States have shown that closeness to natural features is associated with 
higher residential and commercial rents, and premiums on property taxes (Parks Canada, 2014; 
Sherer, 2006). In New York City, for instance, the revitalization of Bryant Park replaced a barren 
landscape associated with drug deals and robberies with an appealing space that now attracts 
thousands of visitors daily. In the two years following the park reopening, leasing activity on 
neighbouring Sixth Avenue increased 60%, prompting brokers to term the revitalised park their 
“deal-clincher” (Sherer, 2006). Similarly, in the city of Berlin, it was found that proximity to 
playgrounds increased property values by 16%, while a high number of street trees resulted in a 
17% increase (Luther & Gruehn, 2001). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 17 

The economic impacts of nature in the city extend beyond beautifying the scenery. Grass, trees, 
parks and other natural areas in cities absorb rainwater, remove pollutants from the air, buffer 
noise pollution, lower air temperature, and reduce urban heat islands; they provide watershed 
protection, flood protection, support biodiversity, and help to mitigate the effects of climate 
change (Hartig et al., 2014; Alberta Recreation and Parks Association, 2010). In addition to 
human comfort, natural areas, or “green infrastructure,” can perform many of the same services 
as gray infrastructure, often at a reduced cost and more reliably, and can offer other economic- 
spinoff benefits, such as extending the life of asphalt in roadways (Alberta Recreation and Parks 
Association, 2010). 

With the growth of sustainable nature-based tourism, the economic benefits associated with 
the natural environment can extend to both urban and rural areas. Representing 10% of world 
GDP and 1 in 10 jobs globally, tourism has a decisive role to play in job and wealth creation, 
environmental protection and poverty alleviation (World Tourism Organisation, 2017). Nature- 
based tourism alone creates a diversity of jobs for a range of sectors and contributes to the 
health of local, regional, and national economies. For example, the niche adventure tourism 
market, valued at $263 billion, is one of the fastest growing categories of tourism globally. In 
Europe, North America, and South America, the adventure travel market had an estimated 
average yearly growth of 65% from 2009-2012 (Center for Responsible Travel, 2016). In Sub- 
Saharan Africa, the promotion of beaches, plentiful wildlife, extensive natural and cultural 
attractions, and adventure opportunities helped increase tourism numbers from a small base of 
just 6.7 million visitors in 1990 to 33.8 million visitors by 2012 (Christie et al., 2014). In Canada, it 
has been shown that visitors to parks directly support more than 64,000 full-time jobs, generate 
$2.9 billion in labour income, and provide $337 million in tax revenue for governments (Parks 
Canada, 2014). Interestingly, in Columbia, South America, the positive evolution of security and 
the exploitation of ecotourism has helped the tourism sector grow at a faster rate than the 
national economy (World Tourism Organisation, 2017). 

In the United States alone, the outdoor recreation economy accounted for 2.0 percent ($373.7 
billion) of GDP in 2016. In addition, the outdoor recreation economy grew 3.8 percent in that 
same year, compared to growth of 2.8 percent in the overall economy. These numbers are 
particularly impressive in that they are larger and more sustainable than the contributions of 
industries such as mining, oil, and gas extraction (1.4% of GDP) (Bureau of Economic Analysis, 
2018). At a global level, it has become evident that tourism, and related sectors such as the 
outdoor adventure industry and outdoor recreation, are drivers of economic growth. The 
economic potential of these industries, however, can only be fully realised and sustained if the 
natural assets on which they are based are protected from degradation. In this way, a 
responsibly-managed nature-based tourism sector could be a global leader and driver of 
sustainable development, with the potential to positively change the world. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 18 

There are inherent risks to be managed as over-use of protected areas, badly planned 
developments, and disregard for local culture and initiatives can all undermine many of the 
potential advantages (Dudley et al., 2017). As a first principle, human interactions with natural 
areas for economic purposes must be responsibly, thoughtfully, and sustainably managed. 

Finally, a growing body of evidence, which is the subject of this report, reminds us our 
relationship with nature profoundly influences our behaviours towards the Earth. Lack of 
personal experiences with nature, as well as lack of understanding of Indigenous peoples’ 
knowledge systems and relationships with nature, limit our understanding of environmental 
challenges and appropriate actions to address those challenges (Cajete & Williams, 2018; 
Gratani, et al., 2016; Cajete, 2015). Experiencing and learning from nature teaches us about 
ourselves, our mental habits and attitudes, our values and beliefs as well as about the 
environment. Therefore, just as scientific knowledge is a key driver in addressing public policy 
and environment and sustainable development-related issues, this research demonstrates the 
importance of considering and integrating the role of personal connections with nature in the 
process. The evidence suggests that experiencing meaningful personal connections with nature 
is as important as scientific knowledge in addressing nature conservation issues (Bamberg & 
Moser, 2006; Klockner, 2013). Knowledge is very important but is not enough on its own to 
cause people to take action to benefit nature (Klockner, 2013; Bamberg & Moser, 2006; 
Monroe, 2003; Stern, 2000; Hungerford & Volk, 1990; Azjen & Fishbein, 1980; Schwartz, 1977). 

So why care? Because healthy nature has economic benefits. Because healthy and accessible 
natural environments support healthy people. Because healthy people reduce social costs. 
Achieving these benefits requires that we have access to nature. And having access to nature 
depends on enough of us caring enough to make sure that there are places and spaces where 
people can experience nature daily or often, and through all stages of their lives. 

The transformative power to heal and move forward in good health is within our shared reach. 
The power lies within our direct relationship with nature itself. We are capable of reversing the 
trends of the immediate past and present in order to achieve a new and positive relationship 
with nature, a relationship that embodies an inherently regenerative and life-nurturing way of 
being on Earth. This regenerative relationship, combined with informed and responsible action, 
will achieve a healing time on Earth. In the process, we may heal ourselves. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 19 

What Do We Know? 
What Does the Evidence Tell Us? 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 20 

The Story of the Lost Girl 

Many Indigenous peoples understand that humans are not separate from the rest of nature. All are 
one. When humans think about how to care for the Earth, we must begin with the recognition that 
we ARE nature, we are of the Earth, all beings are connected and we are one. The symbiotic 
relationship with country is told in many stories, one of which is the story of the lost girl: 

The girl had lost her way. She had wandered far from the Mothers, the Aunties and the Grandmothers, from 
the Fathers and the Uncles and the Grandfathers. She had hidden in the shadow of a rock, and fallen asleep 
while she waited for her brothers and sisters to find her. Now it was night, and no one answered when she 

called, and she could not find her way back to camp. 

The girl wandered, alone. She grew thirsty, so she stopped by a waterhole to drink, and then hungry, so she 
picked some berries from a bush. Then the night grew colder, so she huddled beneath an overhanging rock, 
pressing herself into a hollow that had trapped the warm air of the day. Finally she saw a crow flying in the 

moonlight, flapping from tree to tree and calling ‘Kaw! Kaw! Kaw!’ The girl followed the crow. She followed 
him through the trees and over the rocks and up the hills, until at last she saw the glow of her people’s 

campfires in the distance. 

The people laughed and cried at once to see that the girl was safe. They growled at her for her foolishness, 
and cuddled her, and gave her a place by the fire. Her little brother asked her if she had been afraid; but 
the girl said – "How could I be frightened? I was with my Mother. When I was thirsty, she gave me water; 
when I was hungry, she fed me; when I was cold, she warmed me. And when I was lost, she showed me the 

way home." 

Kwaymullina (2005) 

Indigenous Perspectives and Indigenous Knowledge Systems 

Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) is being incorporated formally into scientific research projects, 
especially where historic and in-depth knowledge is needed to understand how best to adapt to climate 
change (Robbins, 2018). 

Indigenous peoples throughout the world are among those most passionately and courageously working 
to give voice to our interconnectedness with all other beings and humans’ associated responsibilities. 
The convictions and actions of many of these courageous leaders put them in constant danger from 
those who would challenge their voices. Yet, they carry on. We honor their sacrifices and learn from 
their legacy. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 21 

What Do We Know? What Does the Evidence Tell Us? Summary Statements 

Humans are not separate from the rest of nature.

Many Indigenous cultures, including both ancient and contemporary traditions, offer the 
perspective of humanity’s oneness with all that is.

This sense of oneness with the natural world, which is characteristic of much spiritual 
experience, is consistent with the understanding of life in contemporary science.

Exposure to nature promotes human health throughout our lives, and strengthens our physical, 
mental and social well-being.

Meaningful, positive experiences in nature can help create connectedness, an emotional affinity 
or love of nature.

There are many ways to connect with, value, and take action to benefit the Earth and its
living systems.

Awareness, knowledge and pro-environment attitudes tend not to be enough to inspire
and cause action to occur.

Connectedness to nature is a strong predictor of positive conservation behaviour.

Positive, direct experiences in nature during childhood and role models of care for nature by 
someone close to the child are the two factors that contribute most to individuals choosing to 
take action as adults to benefit the environment.

Connectedness to nature is facilitated by meaningful experiences in nature and mentoring.

A meaningful connection to nature can be facilitated and enhanced throughout our lives, may 
start at any time, and occur in a variety of settings, including within wild, rural, and urban 
environments.

There are adult pathways to conservation behaviour.

Experiences to foster environmental commitment and action tend to be most successful when 
they occur over an extended period of time, include opportunities to acquire and practice action 
skills, and result in some tangible success in accomplishing at least some of the intended goals.



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 22 

Indigenous Wisdom: We Are One 
What we know begins with ancient and Indigenous wisdom, wisdom which is based on natural law, the 
workings of the land and relationships. In the South Pacific, New Zealand’s Maori people have 
traditionally held a deep connection to the environment, focused on their tribal lands and waters in 
particular. The Maori world view positions Maori as both part of the natural system and guardians for 
that system (Cowie et al., 2016; Panelli & Tipa, 2007). In Australia, Aboriginal culture was founded on 
the belief that people and nature are created as one, and humans do not have dominion over the 
natural world. Tribes had their own wisdom to connect them to the land or “country” (Gammage, 2011; 
Hall & Hendricks, 2012). For Aboriginal peoples, the concept of “country” embodies resilience. It is the 
holistic engagement of a person with a specific physical location that is both symbolic and real. 

In North and South America, Indigenous people have many ways of remembering and practicing Earth- 
based wisdom. For example, for the Makunas, Eastern Tukanoan groups from the Northwest Amazon, 
humans and non-human beings share many of the same places. There is no separation between beings. 
There is no separation between the visible and invisible, or between culture and nature, making evident 
the complete interdependence of all living beings (Cayón, 2008). 

The medicine wheel, or circle of life, is a powerful teaching tool (Lane, Jr., et al., 1984). One aspect of the 
medicine wheel, in connection with the tree of life, is that it “reflects the four great developmental 
stages that give meaning and foundation to each human being through life: protection, nourishment, 
growth and wholeness” (Cajete, 2015, p.11). 

Dr. Gregory Cajete, Native American educator and Tewa Indian, offers this explanation: 
Through an understanding of "protection" (the shade of the tree), we come to see how 
the earth itself and other life provide for our human lives and well-being. In 
understanding the nature of "nourishment" (the fruit of the tree), we see what we need 
to grow, to live a good life. We come to understand how we are nourished through the 
relationships we have at all levels of our nature and from all the other sources that 
share their "life" with us. We also come to know that, as we are nourished, we nourish 
others in turn. 
As a tree grows through different stages . . . . . we come to understand that 

growth and change are key dynamics of life . . . . . And then there is wholeness . . . . . It 

means finding our place as part of a greater life process, one that is rooted to a past, 
present, and future ecology of mind and spirit (Cajete, 2015, p.11). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 23 

Ancient Traditions: We Are One 
Other traditions, similarly spanning millennia, also offer the perspective of humanity’s oneness 
with all that is. Among those are contemplative and meditative practices, including those from 
Buddhist and Taoist traditions. An ancient approach to oneness with all Life is known in India as 
Sanatan Dharma. Here we are not referring to what some describe as the foundation for 
Hinduism. Instead, we are drawing from the understanding of Sanatan Dharma that describes it as 
“the eternal religion” and thinks of it as the tree of life for all the world religions in the sense that 
it is universal, inclusive and transcendent. According to Paramhansa Yogananda, as told by Swami 
Kriyananda, “Sanatan Dharma, rightly understood, is rooted in the foundations of the universe . . . 
(T)he goal of Sanatan Dharma is twofold: the upliftment of human consciousness, on the one 
hand, and the expansion of our self-identity through love, on the other, that we embrace all life 
and all reality as our own (Kriyananda, 1998)."

As naturalist and educator, Joseph Cornell, explains, “The Bible says, ’Be still and know….’ The Chinese 
philosopher Lao Tzu agrees, ‘To the mind that is still, the whole universe surrenders.’ Calm feeling is 
intuition, which is like a lake without ripples, reflecting life clearly and completely. The soul uniting with 
God, or larger Reality, lies at the core of all religious revelation. Spiritual nature experiences have the 
following traits in common: overwhelming peace, oneness, and intense beauty. The more alive we feel, 
the more nature becomes alive and sacred. Feeling is the aspect of human consciousness that has to do 
with intention. Absorbing, serene nature experiences calm and uplift the feelings in the heart, creating a 
firm foundation for a person to truly care for the earth (Cornell, 2018).” 

Contemporary Science: We Are One 
Contemporary science increasingly supports the view that spiritual traditions and scientific 
evidence are congruent and complementary. Spirituality relates to our inner experiences and 
beliefs that give meaning to existence and go beyond the current context. Kamitsis and Francis 
(2013) looked at the role of spirituality in the link between connection to nature and well-being. 
They found that being connected with nature, and having a sense of connection to nature, was 
linked to both greater spirituality and mental well-being, with spirituality being a possible source 
of the increased well-being. As Fritjof Capra says in his 2009 introduction to his classic, The Tao of 
Physics, originally published in 1975: 

(T)he experience of being connected with all of nature, of belonging to the universe, is
the very essence of spirituality . . . Spiritual experience is an expression of aliveness of
mind and body as a unity. Moreover, this experience of unity transcends not only the
separation of mind and body, but also the separation of self and world. The central
awareness in these spiritual moments is a profound sense of oneness with all, a sense of
belonging to the universe as a whole. This sense of oneness with the natural world,
which is characteristic of spiritual experience, is fully borne out by the understanding of
life in contemporary science.



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 24 

Exposure to Nature Contributes to Care for Ourselves and Others 
Being exposed to nature has profound health benefits, including increased physical activity, 
reduced symptoms of mental health disorders, increased relaxation and an enhanced overall 
sense of well-being (Chawla & Litt, 2013; Kuo, 2010). There is evidence that experiences in nature 
promote positive social behaviour, including kindness, altruism, generosity and resource-sharing 
(Weinstein et al., 2009). Simply viewing beautiful nature scenes can result in people being 
demonstrably more cooperative and generous to others, even in the presence of strangers. 
Among the benefits, a growing body of evidence on the science of awe—experiencing a profound 
response to what is perceived as the wonder of nature—can inspire people to solve problems 
more cooperatively and creatively (Stellar et al., 2017; Piff et al., 2015). 

Bonding with Nature Contributes to Care for the Earth 
What is referred to as nature connectedness is a relatively new field of study. Increasing evidence 
indicates that experience with nature can create a connectedness—that is, an emotional affinity 
or love of nature, oneness with all that is. Such connectedness can occur in a variety of settings. In 
fact, connectedness with nature is emerging as a strong predictor of positive conservation 
behaviours (Mayer & Frantz, 2004; Geng et al., 2015; Braun & Dierkes, 2017; Otto & Pensini, 
2017; Beery & Jorgensen, 2018). Such a bond contributes to a person’s identity as well as their 
tendencies to care about, conserve and protect nature (Kals, Schumacher & Montada, 1999; 
Schultz, 2002; Hinds & Sparks, 2009; Goralnik & Nelson, 2011; Beery, 2013). 

An emotional bond with nature influences people’s thoughts, attitudes and behaviours. Along 
with one’s personal sense of identity, a strong emotional bond can affect whether or not a person 
chooses to be physically close to nature. This bond can inspire a feeling of safety when close to 
nature or distress when separated from it. It can spark a willingness to invest financial or mental 
resources in nature or, importantly, to protect it from harm (Green, 2018; Park & MacInnis, 2006). 

While much remains to be understood about what factors contribute to human actions that 
benefit the Earth, scholars continue to offer deeper insight into this area of study. One thing is 
clear, as Ardoin and colleagues observe, “One model could never explain all environmental 
behaviours for any person in every context” (Ardoin et al., 2013, p.16). This theme—that there are 
many ways to connect with, value, and take action to benefit the Earth and its living systems— 
runs throughout the conservation-related literature. 

Some of the earliest academic work to discern patterns and relationships within human behaviour 
related to actions to benefit nature was conducted initially in the 1970s and 1980s (Hungerford & 
Volk, 1990). With time, meta-analyses have resulted in an affirmation of what is currently a 
generally agreed-upon view: While awareness remains important, knowledge alone tends not to 
be enough to cause people to take action to benefit the environment (Bamberg & Moser, 2006; 
Klockner, 2013). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 25 

Several models now suggest that general attitudes do not always directly influence behaviour 
(Schwartz, 1977; Azjen & Fishbein, 1980; Stern, 2000; Monroe, 2003). Conservation and pro- 
environment attitudes may also be insufficient to inspire and cause action. More than a positive 
attitude tends to be needed. 

Meaningful Childhood Experiences in Nature Are Connected to Adult Conservation Behaviours 
Formal studies of the relationships between nature-based experiences and a conservation ethic is a 
relatively recent phenomenon. Tanner (1980) notably explored this connection, finding that most 
people who chose a life in which they demonstrated commitment to the environment reported 
significant experiences with nature in their childhood. For most of these individuals, the natural habitats 
were accessible for unstructured play and discovery nearly every day when they were children. In the 
years since, the number of studies, and systematic analyses that review the strength of the collective 
evidence from those studies, has been increasing. 

In 2006, researchers Wells and Lekies went beyond studying the childhood influences of 
environmentalists; they looked at a broad sample of urban adults, ages 18 to 90. Their study indicated 
that the most direct route to adult concern and behaviour related to the environment is participating in 
such “wild nature activities” as playing independently in the woods, hiking, and fishing during childhood. 
While other nature-based activities can also have an instrumental influence, those activities that 
required independent behaviour and some autonomy were more influential than structured and guided 
activities (Wells & Lekies, 2006). 

This does not mean that people cannot develop a commitment to care for the Earth as adults. Nor does 
the natural environment need to be pristine and rural; places of nature within urban and other 
populated settings are effective too (Kellert et al., 2017). It does mean that nature-based experiences in 
childhood increase the odds that more people will care and take action throughout their lives. Louise 
Chawla, for decades, has brought voice to the factors that most tend to contribute to a lifelong passion 
to care for the Earth (Chawla, 1998). Chawla and Derr make this statement: 

Existing research suggests that if societies seek to achieve a sustainable world where not 
only will people act to protect the biosphere today but also future generations will value 
this goal and work for its achievement, then children need to be provided with regular 
access to nature. Research has linked a background of childhood play in nature with every 
form of care for the environment (Chawla and Derr, 2012, in Clayton, p. 548). 

In addition to the importance of play in nature, there is an important role for human interactions. 
Chawla and Derr state: 

Research on formative experiences of environmentally active adolescents and adults 
repeatedly shows the role of parents and other family members who model care for nature 
and encourage their child’s interests, as well as friends, teachers and mentors (Chawla and 
Derr, 2012, p. 549). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 26 

These two factors contribute most to children developing into adults who take action to benefit 
the environment: positive direct experiences in nature during childhood and role models of care 
for nature by someone close to the child—for example, a parent, grandparent, or other trusted 
guardian (Chawla, 1998; Chawla, 2006; Chawla, 2009; Chawla & Derr, 2012). As Chawla has found, 
most attribute their commitment to many hours spent outdoors in “keenly remembered” wild or 
semi-wild places, and a mentoring adult who taught respect for nature (Chawla, 2006). It is 
notable that these findings are now based on diverse samples of people from many parts of the 
world (Chawla & Cushing, 2007). A number of studies, from Germany to Taiwan, provide support 
for the important role of childhood recreation in nature, often with family members, as a 
predictor of behaviours to protect the environment (Hsu, 2017; Kals et al., 1999). 

There Are Adult Pathways to Conservation Behaviours 
While childhood time in nature is clearly instrumental in developing a lifelong commitment to care for 
the Earth, a positive and meaningful connection to nature can be facilitated and enhanced throughout 
our lives—and may start at any time. Opportunities to cultivate that sense of connection can be 
created, as well, in varied settings—including wild and rural areas as well as within the urban 
environments where more and more people live. 

A large-scale campaign to engage people with nature is 30 Days Wild, conducted in the UK and 
sponsored by The Wildlife Trusts. Two elements are particularly notable: the number of people involved, 
and the duration of the nature-based experiences within the time frame of the study. Over the first 
three years, approximately 80,000 people signed up online to register to participate in nature-based 
activities for 30 consecutive days. Results reported in a study of some of those who participated 
indicated personal benefits including increases in reported health and well-being, along with positive 
conservation and environment-related behaviours (Richardson et al., 2016; Richardson & McEwan, 
2018; Richardson et al., 2018). 

Several studies have demonstrated a positive relationship between the level of involvement in nature- 
based activities as diverse as fishing (Oh & Ditton, 2008; Oh & Ditton, 2006), SCUBA diving (Thapa, Grefe 
& Meyer, 2006) and bird watching (Cheung, Lo & Fok, 2017; Hvenegaard, 2002; McFarlane & Boxall, 
1996), and an individual’s concern for the resources on which their activity depends. Others have found 
an association between people’s sense of place and their conservation and pro-environment 
behaviours. Having a sense of place may include an attachment to a specific place as well as its personal 
meaning to them and to their identity. This suggests that people who develop a sense of place are more 
likely to want to protect it and to oppose the degradation of its environment (Tonge et al., 2015; 
Ramkissoon, Smith & Weiler, 2013; Halpenny, 2010; Stedman, 2002; Vaske & Kobrin, 2001). Some 
studies have suggested these links extend to more general care for the environment in everyday life 
(Halpenny, 2010; Vaske & Kobrin, 2001). For those who already have positive attitudes toward the 
environment, regular time in nature may play an affirming role by keeping nature “top of mind” and 
increasing the likelihood that they will take action to benefit the environment (Thapa, 2010; Tarrant & 
Green, 1999; Manfredo, Yuan & McGuire, 1992). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 27 

The Nature of Americans is a major study of nearly 12,000 American adults and children with the goal of 
better understanding and encouraging Americans’ relationship with nature. Its final report was released 
in 2017 and is filled with valuable and useful insights and information. Among its recommendations is 
the importance of regular, even frequent, experiences outdoors in nature. The authors (Kellert et al., 
2017) state, “Our research indicates that sporadic and occasional contact with the natural world is 
insufficient to instill in children and adults the curiosity, wonder and connection they require for nature 
to become a meaningful part of their lives.” They encourage habitual experiences, making nature a part 
of people’s daily lives. How can this vision be realized? Regular experiences in nature can be gained in a 
variety of ways. The image of a romantic adventure where solitude brings transformation is one path to 
nature’s abundant gifts, but it is not the most frequent. As the authors state, “Nature experienced alone 
can be a powerful thing for many, but this is the exception, not the primary way adults and children 
experience nature (Kellert et al., 2017)."

Many people today, especially those with little or no connection to nature through direct experience, 
need and benefit from the company of family and friends to inspire joyful time in natural spaces. Such 
experience can be satisfied by places of nearby nature, which are the most accessible for most people. 
Research indicates that by simply noting “three good things in nature” each day for a week, people’s 
connection to nature improves (Richardson et al., 2017). An analysis of these “good things” in nature 
indicates that people enjoy the sensations of nature, temporal change, active wildlife, beauty and 
colour. The results of this analysis may be used to provide direction and guidance for those seeking to 
connect people with nearby nature (Richardson et al., 2015). Community-based social marketing 
(McKenzie-Mohr, 2011), conservation psychology (Clayton & Saunders, 2012) and the Fogg Behaviour 
Model (www.behaviormodel.org) are rich sources of additional insights for application to the 
development of conservation and pro-environment behaviours. 

A powerful and effective approach to engaging families and friends is occurring through the growth, 
internationally, of locally-driven, self-organizing, groups of people interested in getting children 
outdoors in nature on a regular basis. Encouraged by and called Nature Clubs for Families by the 
Children & Nature Network, they are taking form from Calgary to Bangalore, from China to Brazil. 
Frequently organized by a parent or group of parents, these clubs or groups typically meet on a weekly 
or monthly basis, with their children of all ages along with other family members and friends, to explore 
a nature-based setting for a few hours at a time (Children & Nature Network, 2014). Research 
conducted on some of these groups is finding enormous benefits to family bonding, enhanced 
confidence and creativity on the part of children, appreciation and respect for their children’s interests 
and strengths on the part of parents, and the kind of connectedness to nature that research indicates is 
key to a lifelong commitment to care for the Earth (D’Amore & Chawla, in press; D’Amore & Chawla, 
2017; D’Amore, 2015). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 28 

Nature Connectedness Is Vital to Conservation Action 
A number of measures of nature connectedness have been developed in recent years and used to 
explore the relationship between connectedness and action to benefit the environment (Geng et al., 
2015; Tam, 2013; Nisbet et al., 2009). Wright and Matthews (2015) state, “Nature connectedness refers 
to the degree to which individuals include nature as part of their identity through a sense of oneness 
between themselves and the natural world,” and observe, “(T)here is evidence demonstrating that 
those who are more connected are more supportive of conservation, and that nature connectedness 
predicts environmental concern.” Mayer & Frantz (2004) describe connectedness as a sense of “we- 
ness,” which as a psychological process helps humans to feel empathy for nature, to care for nature, and 
to feel committed to its protection. Zylstra and colleagues (2014) define connectedness with nature as 
“a stable state of consciousness comprising symbiotic cognitive, affective and experiential traits that 
reflect, through consistent attitudes and behaviours, a sustained awareness of the interrelatedness 
between one’s self and the rest of nature.” They find hope within the construct, and view it as a 
“necessary prerequisite for realizing desired conservation and environmental behaviour outcomes.” 
That view is supported by recent research that suggests environmental knowledge may explain only 2% 
of what is linked to ecological behaviour, while connectedness to nature explains 69% (Otto & Pensini, 
2017). 

Cheng and Monroe (2012) developed an index to investigate and assess children’s connection to nature. 
They identified four major dimensions: enjoyment of nature, empathy for creatures, a sense of oneness, 
and a sense of responsibility. In the UK, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) used the 
measure to show that four out of five UK children are not connected to nature (RSPB, 2013). In a survey 
of 775 children, the measure also showed that children who were more connected to nature had 
significantly better health, higher life satisfaction, pro-environmental behaviours and pro-nature 
behaviours (Richardson et al., 2016). Other factors influencing children’s behaviours toward nature 
include their previous experience, their family values, and their perceived control or sense of efficacy. 
Connection to nature is the strongest predictor of students’ interest in participating in nature-based 
activities. Connection to nature, family values toward nature, self-efficacy and previous experiences in 
nature all have direct influence on the interest students develop in environmentally-friendly practices. 

Giusti and his colleagues conducted a study that provides additional insight into the characteristics of 
nature-based experiences that have a positive effect on the development of a child’s connection to 
nature. The study reports that children’s connections may be significantly nurtured by nature-based 
experiences with these qualities: entertainment, thought provocation, intimacy, awe, mindfulness, 
surprise, creative expression, physical activity, sensory engagement, involvement of mentors, 
involvement of animals, social or cultural endorsement, structure or rules, child-driven, challenging, and 
personally restorative (Giusti et al., 2018). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 29 

There is increasing recognition and a growing body of research that shows time spent in nature 
increases the likelihood of viewing one’s self as a part of the natural world. Jordan and Kristjánsson 
(2017) argue that the underlying basis of our unsustainability is “a human-nature relationship and 
worldview, which fails to encompass interconnectedness and the interrelatedness of environmental and 
social issues;" and the importance of “a more holistic view of human flourishing as necessarily situated 
within nature.” Nature connection experiences “need to engage participants in re-examining who we 
are, and how we are connected to everything around us…any change that is short of that scale will not 
solve the problems we face (Ehrenfeld and Hoffman, 2013, p.4)." 

Many studies present the ethical significance of child’s play in nature (Sandell & Öhman 2010; Postma & 
Smeyers, 2012; Bonnett, 2012). The evidence highlights the value of nature connection in developing a 
moral regard for self, others, and nature. Connecting to child-like play and joy in life is argued by Postma 
& Smeyers (2012) as more effective in motivating children to act, think and have moral regard than 
trading on fear. Nature connection can move us from a focus on objects to a focus on interactions and 
relationships, and shift our concentration from “preventing doom” to “anticipating care” (Postma & 
Smeyers, 2012, p.409). Related to this is Jon Young’s and colleagues’ 8 shields connection modeling, the 
8Shields Village Builders and Regenerative Communities movements (www.8shields.org). The model 
explicitly recognises that deep and sustained nature connection can only happen with the container of 
culture and community. Nature connection nurtures people connection and vice versa. They are 
inseparable. The emerging field of nature-based leadership also draws on concepts from natural systems 
to inform and guide healthy relationships within one’s self, with others, within communities and 
organisations, and in relationship to the Earth itself (Charles, 2018). 

One recent approach to fostering connectedness to nature among adults, as well as children, is based on 
the typology of values associated with the biophilia hypothesis (Kellert & Wilson, 1993). The biophilia 
hypothesis describes the human need to affiliate with nature—that is, to connect with nature. The 
tendency to affiliate or connect can be weak or strong, and can be cultivated throughout a person’s life. 
This relationship with nature and affiliation for life is often unconscious, manifesting in various ways 
which Kellert categorized into a typology of values of nature or nine biophilic values: Aesthetic, 
Dominionistic, Humanistic, Moralistic, Naturalistic, Negativistic, Scientific, Symbolic, Utilitarian (Kellert, 
2002, p. 130; Burgess & Mayer-Smith, 2011). Having an understanding of these values provides practical 
and powerful ways to enhance connectedness. This approach allows for increased precision when 
designing and offering nature-based experiences by resonating with people’s dominant values related to 
wildlife and the environment. Lumber, Richardson and Sheffield (2017) have tested experiences tied to 
the biophilic values to determine which are most effective in enhancing adults’ connectedness to 
nature. While potentially relevant, the utilitarian and scientific biophilic values were not found by these 
researchers to be as powerful as the others. The researchers then re-named the values found to be most 
strongly associated with the development of connectedness to nature to optimize and operationalize 
their usefulness to researchers, practitioners, policymakers and the general public. 



Conservation and Pro-environment 
Behaviours 
Nature connectedness is gaining 
coherence and momentum as being vital 
to conservation and pro-environment 
behaviour. Connectedness takes many 
forms. It can be stimulated, maintained 
and enhanced in various ways. However 
formed, it is a strong predictor of 
conservation actions among people of 
any age. It is so powerful that it can 
become a way of life, a lifestyle that 
benefits everyone—from self to others to 
the environment. 

Those actions that rise to the level of 
lifestyle, manifesting connectedness to 
nature in the form of care for the Earth, 
vary widely. Recycling, eating locally and 
organically, reducing consumption, 
walking or biking rather than taking fossil- 
fuel driven transportation, volunteering 
for habitat restoration projects, voting for 
pro-environment people and policies, 
making donations to protected areas, and 
choosing vocations that serve rather than 
pollute the environment are all examples. 
The research literature uses a range of 
such behaviours as indicators of whether 
or not people exercise care for the 
environment. 

ure Network 30 

The biophilic values of naturalistic, humanistic, symbolic, moralistic and aesthetic were the most 
powerful, and translate into the values of contact, emotion, meaning, compassion and beauty (Lumber, 
Richardson & Sheffield, 2017). These are not necessarily mutually exclusive and tend to be interactive. 
These values now serve as a framework and set of criteria for designing and encouraging nature-based 
experiences to enhance connectedness with nature among people of all ages. For example, the 
framework has recently been adopted by the National Trust in the UK to help connect their 4 million 
members more closely with nature, and also informs their main nature engagement campaign for 
children. 

 

HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nat 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 31 

Mindfulness and Connectedness to Nature 
Mindfulness is a form of connection. It can be defined as a state of awareness characterised by 
purposeful attention towards current experience with an open, non-judging, and accepting attitude 
(Malinowski, 2017). It includes awareness of one’s emotions, cognitions, and mind states, as well as 
awareness of one’s environment and relationship to others (Jazaieri et al., 2013). In a way similar to the 
effect of nature connection, mindfulness practices influence and regulate behaviours, and can enhance 
a person’s focus on feelings and thoughts about the natural world (Barbaro & Pickett, 2016). Wang and 
colleagues (2016) demonstrate the effectiveness of “mindful learning” for improving connectedness to 
nature and strengthening values related to compassion. Mindful learning can result in breaking pre- 
existing thinking patterns and promote openness and the development of a new pattern of thinking 
where ‘‘nature” and ‘‘humans” overlap and become unified, thereby improving connectedness to nature 
(cited in Wang et al., 2016, p.3). 

Effective Program and Personal Characteristics 
Chawla and Cushing analyzed relevant theory and literature to define what they refer to as “education 
for strategic environmental behaviour” (Chawla and Cushing, 2007). Their interest was to build on the 
understanding of what contributes to people taking action to benefit the environment. To do so, they looked 
deeply at a broad range of factors, beyond childhood play and learning in nature with adult guides, to gain 
strategic insights. With meaningful nature-based experiences as the foundation, what else is a 
significant influence on actual behaviours? Programs and structured activities were included in their 
review. Their synthesis indicates that programs designed to foster environmental commitment and 
action are most successful when they occur over an extended period of time, include opportunities to 
acquire and practice action skills, and result in some tangible success in accomplishing at least some of 
the intended goals. Some success, often beginning on a small scale, allows for the development of 
perceived confidence and a sense of efficacy (Chawla & Cushing, 2007). 

Intention, affect, emotions, and a subtle range of influences are all part of the process. Knowledge alone 
will not make the difference. Direct experiences, self-directed learning and play, repeated exposures, a 
perceived belief in one’s own personal efficacy, a caring mentor, and an emotional bond or 
connectedness—these are among the strongest influencers. 

From Individual to Aggregate: The Issue of Scale 
While it is important to identify the key factors that stimulate individual actions, when we consider the 
scale of the challenges facing humanity today, we must also be thinking about actions in the aggregate. 
What combines to make a significant difference? 

Simply recognizing that individual actions add up to a larger whole is instrumental. A recent study about 
factors affecting people’s likelihood to take action to affect global climate change is helpful. In this 
context, the researchers found that highlighting collective responsibility was more effective than 
appealing to personal responsibility (Obradovich & Guenther, 2016). 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 32 

Others have established similar findings for challenges occurring on a large scale: a sense of personal 
efficacy combined with an appeal to collective responsibility is most effective. In other words, “(T)he 
effect of private action is limited unless it is combined with organizing for collective public 
change”(Chawla and Cushing, 2007; p. 441). 

Social norms are powerful as well. Recent research by Jung and Metcalf (2017) indicates that the people 
you surround yourself with play a big role in whether you feel able to act on personal environmental 
values. In a study of ethical behaviour in the financial sector in Australia, they found that if your team 
appears to support being environmentally responsible, you will feel you are able to be so as well. In 
addition, environmental values appear to work best at a group level, meaning that we are able to 
understand aspects of the environment better if we try to understand them through group discussion. 

Nature Connection through Education 
All educational institutions can contribute to children, youth and adults taking action to conserve and 
protect natural systems. Opportunities include curricula and courses that are designed to include 
purposeful immersion in natural environments; place-based and experiential education; nature-based 
exercises that create space for reflection; and experiences that foster connectedness, including 
compassion and empathy (Selby, 2017; Sobel, 2008). Education can serve a powerful role to provide 
meaningful experiential opportunities for learners to match their values related to nature with personal 
actions that support those values in the larger world; that is, helping people match what they value with 
how they act in the world. See Appendix 1 for additional information. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 33 

Guiding Principles Based on the Evidence 
Here is a summary of the major findings that may serve as guiding principles for creating a culture of 
conservation and care for the Earth. 

What We Know from the Evidence* 

Guiding Principles Supporting Research 
Knowledge is very important but is not 
enough on its own to cause people to 
take action to benefit nature. 

Klockner, 2013; Bamberg & Moser, 2006; Monroe, 2003; 
Stern, 2000; Hungerford & Volk, 1990; Azjen, 1991; Azjen & 
Fishbein, 1980; Schwartz, 1977. 

Connectedness with nature is a strong 
predictor of positive conservation 
behaviour. 

Beery, 2013; Beery & Jorgensen, 2018; Otto & Pensini, 2017; 
Braun & Dierkes, 2017; Richardson et al., 2016; Geng et al., 
2015; Wright & Matthews, 2015; Zylstra et al., 2014; Mayer 
& Frantz, 2004. 

Meaningful, positive experience in nature 
is a powerful way of developing a 
connection with, or love of, nature that 
can in turn guide people toward care for 
the Earth. 

D’Amore & Chawla, in press; D’Amore & Chawla, 2017; 
Beery, 2013; Chawla & Derr, 2012; Goralnik & Nelson, 2011; 
Hinds & Sparks, 2009; Chawla, 2006; Schultz, 2002; Kals, 
Schumacher & Montada, 1999; Chawla, 1998. 

Positive, direct experiences in nature 
during childhood and role models of care 
for nature by someone close to the child 
are the two factors that most contribute 
to individuals choosing to take action to 
benefit the environment as adults. 

D’Amore & Chawla, in press; Charles & Louv, 2018, in press; 
D’Amore & Chawla, 2017; Hsu, 2017; Broom, 2017; Chawla 
& Derr, 2012; Chawla, 2009; Chawla & Cushing, 2007; Wells 
& Lekies, 2006; Kals et al., 1999; Chawla, 1998; Tanner, 
1980. 

Experiences designed to foster 
environmental commitment and action 
are most successful when they occur over 
an extended period of time, include 
opportunities to acquire and practice 
action skills, and result in some tangible 
success in accomplishing at least some of 
the intended goals. 

Chawla & Derr, 2012; Chawla & Cushing, 2007. 

Social experiences in nature foster 
connectedness to each other and to 
nature. 

D’Amore & Chawla, 2017; Zelenski et al., 2015; D’Amore, 
2015; D’Amore, Charles & Louv, 2015; St. Antoine, Charles & 
Louv, 2012. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 34 

Direct experiences, self-directed learning 
and play, repeated exposures, a 
perceived belief in one’s own personal 
efficacy, a caring mentor, and an 
emotional bond or connectedness are 
among the strongest influencers of 
individual actions to benefit the 
environment. 

D’Amore & Chawla, in press; Charles & Louv, 2018, in press; 
Giusti et al., 2018; Kellert et al., 2017; Richardson et al., 
2017; Richardson et al., 2015; Chawla & Cushing 2007. 

People who develop a sense of place are 
more likely to want to protect it and to 
oppose the degradation of the 
environment. 

Tonge et al., 2015; Ramkissoon, Smith & Weiler, 2013; 
Halpenny, 2010; Stedman, 2002; Vaske & Kobrin, 2001. 

People who are strongly connected to 
nature tend to have high levels of well- 
being, self-esteem and personal growth. 

Charles & Louv, 2018, in press; Becker et al., 2017; 
Richardson et al., 2016; Capaldi et al., 2014. 

People of all ages who participate in 
nature-based activities tend to be 
happier and healthier than those who do 
not. 

Charles & Louv, 2018, in press; Richardson et al., 2017; 
Richardson et al., 2016; WHO, 2015; Townsend et al., 2015; 
Chawla & Litt, 2013; Louv, 2012; Charles & Wheeler, 2012; 
Charles & Senauer, 2010; Kuo, 2010; Louv, 2008. 

*This summary of the evidence is based on theory, research and practice derived from a current review
of literature in peer-reviewed publications, books, book chapters and articles; recommendations from
scholars and researchers in the field who submitted articles and other publications for consideration;
conversations with an informal network of knowledgeable advisors; and review by members of the
project oversight and writing teams, as well as others.



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 35 

What Don’t We Know? 
Where Are the Gaps? 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 36 

What Don’t We Know? Where Are the Gaps?  Summary Statements 

 While there are gaps in the research, the findings are consistent: meaningful, age-appropriate
nature-based experiences contribute to a commitment and actions to care for the Earth.

 Most studies tend to be based on relationships; that is, most are correlational, and not
measures of cause and effect.

 Additional well-designed and rigorous research is needed.



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 37 

A Review of the Gaps 
A strong predictor that a person will take conservation and pro-environment action is connectedness to 
nature. This may occur in a variety of ways, and at any age in a person’s life. The evidence is strongest 
that childhood experiences are key. Less clear is the kinds of experiences that contribute to 
connectedness for adults, as well as their duration and frequency. How much is enough? And where? 
The evidence suggests that meaningful nature-based experiences can occur in a variety of places, 
including cities. Research in this and related areas is increasing rapidly. Despite the need for more 
details, the evidence overwhelmingly indicates that positive feelings for nature are critically important 
to care for the Earth. 

Studies that look at the connections between nature-based experiences and human tendencies to 
connect with nature, including actions undertaken to benefit nature, tend to be based on relationships 
between factors. That is, they look at correlations. Cause and effect relationships are difficult to assess. 
Longitudinal studies—those that follow people over long periods of time—are rare, and needed. Some 
measures are currently available retrospectively. Adults, for example, are asked to look backwards in 
time to remember and describe what life experiences led to their behaviours to benefit the 
environment. This provides a helpful, while limited, base of understanding. Future research that 
monitors and evaluates the impact of lifestyles, programming and experiences that are implemented 
specifically to increase connectedness with nature and care for the Earth would go a long way towards 
filling this gap. 

In sum, it is fair to say that the current body of evidence is generally consistent. Additional, well- 
designed and rigorous research is needed to further inform both policy and practice. So too is conscious 
attention to the wisdom still available today from Indigenous knowledge systems, especially about how 
to connect with and learn from nature over time. Despite those limitations, we know enough to say that 
connectedness to nature predicts pro-environment and positive ecological behaviours—that is, care for 
the Earth. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 38 

What Can We Do? 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 39 

What Can We Do? 

Implement Key Recommendations for Policy and Practice 
By establishing a focus on fostering human connectedness with nature in policies and practices across 
diverse sectors, we have the opportunity to improve the human condition and that of the Earth itself. 

Initiatives that embody the following characteristics are particularly encouraged: 
 Education and child care policies that enable time outdoors in nature and experiential learning

about nature in early childhood and throughout life;
 Health and elder care policies that deliver the health benefits of contact with nature for people

of all ages;
 Community planning and urban development policies to create nature-rich cities that include

urban parks and protected areas for the benefit of people and nature;
 Parks, outdoor recreation, and tourism policies that encourage family-friendly experiences;

interpretive programmes; and outdoor, nature-based and experiential education;
 Arts and culture policies that promote the integration of culture and nature to develop a sense

of oneness with nature while celebrating stories of connection and healing;
 Policies that encourage private sector investment in environmentally sustainable programming,

infrastructure, and innovative solutions such as technology for connecting people with nature;
and

 Policies that call for biodiversity conservation organisations to work across sectors so that all
people, equitably and inclusively, experience the diverse benefits of connectedness with nature.

Additional guidelines for practice include: 
 Use a variety of tools, including social media and community-based social marketing, to

encourage those with high levels of connectedness to communicate and share their
values and experiences with others, including children and youth, and to engage those
not yet connected with nature.

 Allow for immersion and frequent experiences of caring for nature to encourage the growth of
perceived efficacy, knowledge, connection and commitment over time.

 Prepare people of all ages to transfer their learnings about responsible environmental practices
from their experiences in what may be distant settings, such as field trips and wilderness
adventures, to their everyday lives at home.

 Recognise that people hold a variety of values related to nature, so design and implement
policies and practices that will resonate with those values

 Help people do what they already do, such as having a social gathering or a meeting, but do it
outdoors.

 Make it easy, make it social, and make it fun for people to connect with nature.



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 40 

Overcome Barriers to Connectedness 
Despite the fact that connectedness with nature is good for us and good for the Earth, creating 
opportunities to increase connectedness is not always a simple process. Many attributes of 
contemporary life throughout the world contribute to a disconnection between people and nature and 
present barriers to overcoming it.  These may include, for example: 

 Fear and perceptions
 Competing priorities
 Cultural differences
 Degraded environments
 Lack of resources
 Lack of transportation or access
 School and academic environments
 Urbanisation

Governments, organisations, and individuals across the world are implementing policies and practices to 
overcome these barriers. There is a worldwide trend, for example, to bring nature into cities, to enhance 
the opportunities for urban dwellers to experience nearby nature and to facilitate the many benefits 
that nature-rich cities can provide. Creating and supporting parks and protected areas, green 
schoolyards, community gardens, and wildlife corridors are all examples of actions underway in urban 
environments that in turn facilitate opportunities for people of all ages to connect with nature in 
meaningful ways. 

An exemplary effort, the green schoolyards movement is international. Innovative land-use agreements 
within cities are being facilitated between school districts and community groups, making it possible for 
school grounds to be used by community members during hours when children are not using the space 
during regular school times. 

Recognising that safety is a real concern in many circumstances—for example, in areas with high crime 
in cities—people are coming together to create safe outdoor opportunities for children. Some are 
creating rooftop gardens. Others are meeting as family groups to go together to public parks and 
schools with safe and secure nature-based play areas. Some organisations are implementing 
programmes to equip those less familiar with opportunities for connecting with nature with the 
knowledge and tools to experience the natural world. Parks Canada’s Learn to Camp programme, for 
example, is designed to introduce new immigrants and urbanised families to the beauties and benefits 
of nature. Nature Clubs for Families are being formed where parents who are comfortable in the 
outdoors schedule dates and times for families with less experience to play and learn together on a 
weekly or monthly basis (D’Amore, 2015; C&NN, 2014). Group explorations, rather than solitary nature 
experiences, can be a wonderful bridge for celebrating cultural traditions. Families who like to be 
together can create new traditions in nature-based settings, potentially overcoming their fears while in 
one another’s company. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 41 

Lack of resources is a significant barrier, requiring thoughtful action at all levels of society. Lack of 
resources can limit the ability for an individual to get to an outdoor place, to enter it, and to participate 
in an outdoor activity (Pergams & Zeradic, 2008). While many places are nearby and free-of-charge, 
admission, access, or entry fees can discourage people from going out to enjoy natural areas and to 
participate in outdoor recreation activities they offer. Whereas in some cases, these barriers can be real, 
in others they are perceived. For some people, the cost to enter once or many times can be a strain on 
their budget. Others perceive entry and participation to be expensive because they lack the information 
to make a rational assessment. 

Each of these barriers can be addressed, with creativity, collaboration and commitment. Often it is 
mostly a matter of priorities. When people realize the many benefits they will have—from reduced 
crime to family bonding to improved physical health to peace of mind and overall well-being—the 
barriers can quickly dissolve. People and nature are both served in the process. 

Connect to Nature Where We Live, Work, Learn and Play 
Mounting evidence about links between nature-based experiences and conservation behaviours is 
stimulating action, including the development and implementation of policies and practices. Some 
derive from ancient wisdom, transmitted via many cultures and traditions. Others are newer, and are 
emerging out of a need to create and re-create nature-based experiences for people of many ages in an 
era when changes are rapidly contributing to humans’ disconnect from nature in their everyday lives. 

With the worldwide trend toward urbanisation, creating nature-rich cities and urban protected areas is 
an essential part of a long-term strategy to care for the Earth. The ultimate goal is to connect people of 
all ages to nature, wherever they are, in ways so meaningful and powerful that they will be compelled to 
take action on a regular basis to benefit the Earth. In return, people everywhere will experience the 
benefits of nature for themselves, their families and their communities. 

The urban environment has a critical part to play, where daily experiences within nature-rich cities can 
potentially transform the way we live, work, learn and play. By designing our city environments in ways 
that seamlessly weave in opportunities to experience nature, we can kindle connections to nature that 
achieve an array of social, economic and environmental benefits. In the city of Bogota, for example, a 
recent study found that individuals visiting larger city parks experienced high levels of connectedness to 
nature and feelings of human-nature interdependence (Scopelliti et al., 2016). The presence of nearby 
parks, however, may not be incentive enough for some people to visit. Urban green spaces seem to be 
most successful at attracting diverse population groups where these feature social engagement and 
participation elements (WHO, 2017). In addition to ease of access, it is also important that urban 
greening policies support activities that enhance human-nature integration in order to improve human 
and environmental health in cities (Lin et al., 2014). The success of this approach will rely on insightful 
and long-term investment strategies that not only increase the availability and diversity of green and 
blue spaces across our urban landscapes, but also implement policies and practices that increase 
people’s opportunities to connect with nature. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 42 

For many of us, connecting with nature begins at home or nearby: in urban environments, on farms, in 
remote wilderness areas; in schools, care centres, businesses, hospitals and shopping areas; at nature- 
based children’s museums; at zoos, aquariums, and botanical gardens; in places of worship, community 
centres, parks and public places—wherever people are, alone and with others, they can engage in 
practices that emphasize and support their connectedness to nature. Doing so contributes to their own 
health and well-being; that of their families, friends and co-workers; other species; and the Earth itself. 

Design for Biophilic Values to Connect People with Nature 
In whatever the setting, connectedness to nature will be enhanced if the place and related experiences 
are designed to engage one or more of the following human biophilic values: contact, emotion, 
meaning, compassion and beauty. Usefulness and scientific understanding are also important biophilic 
values for some people, but as a sole focus are unlikely to lead to the development of a connected 
relationship with nature. 

What does this mean in a practical sense? It means that we must envision people actively connecting 
with nature with direct contact through their senses, such as listening to birds in a park, smelling flowers 
in a garden, or simply noticing nature. We must be aware of the emotions that may be aroused—awe, a 
sense of joy, excitement, fear of the kind that is associated with an adrenalin rush followed by 
exhilaration, curiosity, peacefulness, gratitude, playfulness and relaxation are examples. An emotional 
connection can instill care—getting to know a place, and its living inhabitants, whether birds, bees or 
other animals, builds the kind of connection that leads to action among some. In others, meaning can be 
engendered through seasonal traditions when a person finds and gets to know a place that, for example, 
comes to represent a place for prayer; a family gathering spot for fun and stories, celebration and play. 
Compassion is often tied to emotion when feelings are aroused that lead to a form of affection and 
bonding that translates into action such as raising funds to protect a natural area, re-vegetating a highly 
used park, or organizing service projects. Beauty is a strong biophilic value for some people and is key to 
well-being benefits. Imagine the sense of wonder and awe that comes on a fresh spring day when 
everything is alive with new growth, or the peaceful blanket of snow on city streets in an early dawn 
where footsteps have not yet marked a path. These kinds of relationships can also be combined with 
others to encourage a meaningful relationship with nature. For example, the contact, meaning and 
beauty of growing food to eat in a community garden or finding wild herbs on the edge of a city park 
creates a kinship through a form of respectful usefulness. Yet for others, wonder and joy are gained 
through the insightful exploration for a scientific understanding of plants and animals. 

All of these are forms of connection that can occur any place, including in cities, and all are examples of 
the kinds of processes and experiences that develop people’s connectedness to nature which, in turn, 
lead to and accompany responsible action. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 43 

Specific Recommendations for Natural Resource Professionals and Policymakers 
(Excerpted and adapted from Harbrow, in press) 

Increase children’s contact with nature and the outdoors as an investment in future conservation 
engagement and recreation behaviour. Such contact also has the potential to provide present and 
future health benefits. Therefore, make it a priority to connect children with nature through nature-rich 
landscaping around their homes, schools, and child care centres; low-cost, family-friendly experiences; 
interpretive nature programs; and outdoor, environmental, place-based and experiential education. 

Develop your audiences’ personal and emotional connections with nature, which may be associated 
with a place or a particular activity. Focus on: 

• Encouraging regular and repeat visits to the outdoors alongside efforts to attract new
participants. This approach is likely to increase the health and well-being benefits for
visitors and the economic benefits for the community.

• Engaging regular visitors who strongly relate to the specific locations they are using in
order to enhance the quality of their experience at the site; e.g., this could include
asking fishers or jet boaters to contribute to freshwater conservation or hikers to
contribute to enhancing habitat for birdlife along a trail. This is likely to be more
effective than seeking contributions for other locations or for more general or unrelated
conservation issues.

• Reducing the barriers, e.g., administrative, cost, for experienced users of the outdoors
to contribute to site improvements for areas they visit frequently.

• Identifying and developing programmes for locations where place attachment can
stimulate visitors to contribute to conservation. This is most likely to occur at sites
where there is frequent repeat use and where visitors spend significant time onsite, e.g.,
favoured family campsites where the same people may return year after year, and
favoured recreation sites close to where people live.

Appeal to people who may lack a strong connection to particular natural areas, e.g., infrequent or 
first-time visitors and tourists, by offering: 

• Experiences that are truly iconic and/or awe-inspiring while being mindful of risks.
• Sites that offer encounters with charismatic wildlife.
• High-use sites where the volume of visitors may compensate for the lower level of

engagement and help to overcome fears.
• Sites where visits are led by friendly and knowledgeable guides who can facilitate

successful experiences for visitors.
• Sites supported by infrastructure and facilities that encourage and support exploration

and learning by nature novices.
• Reduced barriers for easy, satisfying, and meaningful experiences for first-time and

infrequent visitors.



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 44 

Key strategies consistent with the evidence for successful practices to connect people with nature, as 
well as evidence-based ideas and examples received through collaboration with hundreds of partner 
organisations worldwide, have been summarized in the #NatureForAll Playbook (2017), available at 
http://www.natureforall.global. These strategies are: 
1. Bring children into nature at an early age, and continue through their life course: Let’s provide
opportunities for children and families to participate in fun outdoor activities and learning experiences.
2. Find and share the fun in nature: Outdoor activities can offer new and unique opportunities for
people to connect with others and with themselves, all while enjoying the benefits of nature. Let’s use a
range of communication and marketing tools to share fun and beneficial experiences that can be
enjoyed in nature.
3. Use urban gateways to nature: Let’s use urban parks, gardens, museums, zoos and aquaria to
connect urbanites with nature and let’s invest in “greening measures” to provide access to nature where
people live, work, and play – by greening hospitals, clinics, workplaces, prisons, alleyways, and schools.
4. Embrace technology: Just as digital technology is used to connect people with each other
around the world, it can also facilitate moments of connection between people and nature. Let’s
continue to find new and innovative ways to use technology as a bridge rather than a barrier to nature.
5. Share cultural roots and ancestry in nature: Let’s provide opportunities to explore and share
traditional stories, language and knowledge with local communities and with the broader public.
Together, let’s cultivate a world where connections with nature and each other are valued.
6. Seek out diverse partnerships: To reach our conservation goals, action is needed from most
sectors. Let’s reach out and build partnerships that are inclusive and expand our abilities to connect with
new audiences, increase engagement and tap into new areas of expertise.
7. Empower a new generation of leaders: Mentorship, education-work experiences, and youth
leadership and advocacy training provide young leaders with the skills and confidence to advance in the
conservation field. Let’s work together in intergenerational partnership to inspire those around us to
connect with nature.

http://www.natureforall.global/


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 45 

Conclusion: 
A Call for Inspired Action 

The time is now. The evidence is clear. One of the most important things 
that any of us can do for ourselves, those we love, people throughout the 
world, and the living systems that support us all is to connect with nature. 

That connection can start in the simplest of ways, beginning in childhood 
and renewing through all the stages of life. It can take many forms, and 
occur in many ways. It requires places and spaces for people to connect 
with nature’s richness and complexity from backyards to apartment 
rooftops, on city streets and rural roadways, on school grounds and in 
urban neighbourhoods, from wild protected areas to urban parks. 

Connecting with nature helps to bring us all peace and good health, and 
provides the foundation for resilient, healthy ecosystems, communities, 
and economies to thrive and remain for generations and generations to 
come. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 46 

APPENDIX 1 

Education and Society 

Nature Education in Schooling 

Early Childhood 
There is a vibrant and growing trend to create and offer nature-based preschools and kindergartens 
(Sobel et al., 2016). Such approaches have been integral to early childhood education in Scandinavia 
and Germany for generations. The North American Association for Environmental Education’s Natural 
Start Alliance reports remarkable growth in numbers of such schools in the US and Canada in just the 
past few years. The Child and Nature Alliance of Canada and its forest schools initiative is growing 
exponentially. 

Elementary and Secondary Education 
Outdoor Classroom Day is a global campaign with a goal to make outdoor play and outdoor learning part 
of every school day for every child. In 2017, over 2 million children in over 100 countries took part. A 
programme evaluation found that 1 in 5 educators has since increased playtime and 44% have made 
more time for outdoor lessons (Project Dirt, 2018). 

Numerous resources are available throughout the world to assist educators in integrating ecological 
concepts and experiences throughout K – 12 curricula. The Centre for Environment Education in India is 
one example, as is the IUCN Youth Voices Curriculum Sourcebook. The Global Environmental Education 
Partnership (GEEP) is another. GEEP is a global initiative comprised of environmental education policy 
makers, providers, and practitioners who represent government and/or nongovernmental sectors in 
countries throughout the world. The GEEP was launched by the United States Environmental Protection 
Agency, the Taiwan Environmental Protection Administration, and the North American Association for 
Environmental Education in 2014 to build capacity in member countries to strengthen and 
institutionalize environmental education, focusing on policy, professional development, evaluation, and 
best practices. 

The Udeskole movement in Denmark is notable for its conscious approach to integrating nature-based 
experiences within the curriculum of schools. The practice appears to be growing, and the movement 
includes some promising elements: udeskole tends to be implemented with students on a weekly or bi- 
weekly basis; the approach is cross-disciplinary and grounded in subjects and themes within the national 
curriculum; and the instructional experience is primarily local, embedded in where students live (Barford 
et al., 2016). 

Natural Curiosity is a comprehensive resource that consciously and skillfully incorporates Indigenous 
perspectives and practices in its rationale and recommendations for educators. Developed in the 

https://naaee.org/our-work/programs/global-initiatives


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 47 

province of Ontario, Canada, it embodies the kind of teaching and learning that creates and sustains 
connectedness among learners of all ages (Anderson, et al. 2017). Pathways to Stewardship and Kinship 
is another good resource (2017). 

Citizen science and other community service-oriented approaches are excellent ways to engage upper 
elementary, junior, and senior high school students. Journey North, Monarch Teachers’ Network, 
Bioblitz are all examples. Applicable to all ages is the incorporation of school gardens within curricula 
(Williams, 2015), schoolyard habitat projects, and community gardens that are also used for educational 
purposes. The International Green Schoolyard Alliance and the Children & Nature Network are among 
those helping to encourage outdoor learning environments on school grounds for educational purposes. 
Evergreen in Canada and the Center for Ecoliteracy in the US are also among those promoting the 
benefits of nature-based teaching and learning. 

Technology can be an ally to engage children and youth in nature-based play and learning. The New 
South Wales Office of Environment and Heritage developed and offers the WilderQuest programme that 
includes a website with games and video content that then combines with in-person Ranger-led tours 
and activities in national parks across New South Wales. 

Nature Connection in Higher Education 
As children and youth grow, practice at taking action and developing a sense of efficacy become 
increasingly important. One recent study explored this idea by investigating the impact of the Youth 
Leading Environmental Change (YLEC) program on participants’ action-related competence. YLEC is a 
multi-national education program that engages university-aged students in learning and action projects 
related to environmental issues, with a specific focus on environmental justice. This study describes the 
impact on environmental action competence among participating youth in two of the YLEC countries: 
Uganda and Germany. Overall, findings indicated that the YLEC program helped participants from both 
countries broaden their previous knowledge and experience to activate higher levels of pro- 
environmental engagement and action. This was especially evident in the degree of initiative taken by 
the Ugandan youth in utilizing the resources and opportunities made available through the project. 
Participating Ugandan youth formed strong and long-lasting connections with community resources, 
which gave them opportunities to engage in environmental actions that previously were unavailable to 
them. This outcome reflects Ugandan cultural values of mutual responsibility and collectivism. In 
Germany, YLEC was effective in exposing youth to the assumptions born of privilege. This awareness 
inspired new ideas for action based on promoting environmental well-being on a global scale. The 
findings suggest that multi-national projects can be effective in building on cultural and social diversity 
to help university-aged youth become practiced, confident, and capable environmental actors (Dittmer 
et al., 2018; Riemer et al., 2016). 

Goralnik and Nelson (2017, 2015) report on an interdisciplinary experiential environmental philosophy 
(field philosophy) course at Oregon State University that was delivered 2008 – 2012 in Isle Royale 
National Park, Michigan. Their aim was “to study if and how wilderness experience, coupled with a care- 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 48 

based and community-focused curriculum in place-based ecology and environmental ethics, could help 
students develop empathy for nonhuman nature” (Goralnik and Nelson 2015). The authors concluded 
that “experiential environmental learning focused on the development of empathy can provide a 
meaningful path for students to bridge moral agency, environmental attitudes and knowledge, and 
citizenship skills and behaviour so they can connect their values with action. These results have 
consequential impacts for sustainability learning and action” (Goralnik and Nelson 2015). 

Nature Connection throughout Society 
People throughout society can incorporate ways to connect with nature in their working 
lives. Scientists, medical and well-being practitioners, and educators can all find places for fostering 
nature connection in their profession. So too can manufacturers concerned about employee well-being, 
architects who create spaces in which people live and work, and city planners who impact how people 
access nature. No profession is separate from nature, however distant it may seem. However, most of 
our education institutions do not provide nature connection experiences and even fewer offer tools to 
create connection. There is a need for a societal shift so that the experience and practice of connection 
are part of preparation for a responsible citizenship throughout our lives. The Children & Nature 
Network coined the phrase, “Green play to green pay,” as a way to convey the message of the 
importance of connecting children to nature in their growing years and carrying that ethic to work in 
whatever field they choose.  As mentioned earlier in relation to education, citizen science is also useful 
as a nature connection activity for adults. 

Visit www.childrenandnature.org and http://www.NatureForAll.global for additional examples and 
resources. 

http://www.childrenandnature.org/
http://www.natureforall.global/


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 49 

APPENDIX 2 

Policies and Practices to Connect People with Nature 
There are many policy initiatives underway at every level. These are some prominent examples. 

International 

United Nations, IUCN and Other Multi-national Bodies 
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child includes a right to an education that involves 
respect for the natural environment. Passed in 1989, 196 nations have signed it. There is an effort 
underway to have the Convention include a child’s right to nature. In the meantime, other initiatives are 
progressing. 

In 2015, the United Nations passed Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Achievement of the SDGs 
will require increased attention to connecting people with nature. Several goals are directly or indirectly 
related to nature experience and connectedness.  For example, Goal 4 of the United Nations’ 
Sustainable Development Goals (2015) states, “Ensure inclusive and quality education for all and 
promote lifelong learning.” In the context of sustainable development, this education and lifelong 
learning must necessarily be connected to the living Earth. SDG 4.7 states: By 2030, ensure that all 
learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable development, including, 
among others, through education for sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, 
gender equality, promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation 
of cultural diversity and of culture’s contribution to sustainable development. 

Enhanced efforts to connect people from all walks of life with nature will contribute to achievement of 
several other SDGs including Goal 3 (e.g., 3.4 health and well-being benefits of time in nature), Goal 4 
(e.g., 4.7 experiential education, as noted above), Goal 8 (e.g., 8.9 sustainable tourism that meaningfully 
connects people with nature), Goal 11 (e.g., 11.7 access to nature-rich green and blue spaces in urban 
environments), Goal 14 (conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas and marine resources), 
and Goal 15 (protection, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems). 

The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) is an international treaty and one of the key legal pillars to 
guide multi-national commitments to conservation and sustainable development. One of the targets 
(Aichi Biodiversity Target 1) under its Strategic Plan for Biodiversity (Aichi Biodiversity Target 1) states: 
By 2020 at the latest, people are aware of the values of biodiversity and the steps they can take to 
conserve and use it sustainably. As is noted in the description of Aichi Biodiversity Target 1, addressing 
the direct and underlying drivers of biodiversity loss will ultimately require behavioural change by 
individuals, organisations and governments. However, while Aichi Target 1 addresses the issue of 
awareness, it does not address the important relationship between nature connectedness and 
conservation action. 

https://www.cbd.int/
https://www.cbd.int/cepa/target1/


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 50 

Parties to the CBD should consider enhanced action on connecting people from all walks of life with 
nature as a means by which to achieve Target 1 and inspire pro-conservation behaviours, thereby 
accelerating progress towards achievement of the Strategic Plan and implementation of other aspects of 
the Convention. Post 2020, a renewed Strategic Plan should recognise growing societal disconnect from 
nature as an important indirect driver of biodiversity loss; and it should include strategies for addressing 
this disconnect in order to bring about the transformations necessary to halt biodiversity loss and 
achieve the UN SDGs. Evidence about effective strategies for reversing the influence of disconnect from 
nature as a driver of biodiversity loss, such as those presented in this synthesis, should be used to guide 
post-2020 target-setting. For example, a renewed version of Aichi Biodiversity Target 1 (or its equivalent 
in the Post-2020 Framework) should not only address awareness but also actions to increase 
connectedness of people from all walks of life with nature in order to inspire significantly-enhanced, 
broad-based public and cross-sectoral action on biodiversity conservation. 

The International Union for the Conservation of Nature, whose members include governments, non- 
government organisations, and Indigenous peoples’ organisations, has notably addressed the issues of 
children’s disconnect from nature in its formal proceedings since the World Conservation Congress held 
in Barcelona in 2008 (IUCN, 2008), and culminating with the launch of #NatureForAll in 2016. 

At the 2008 Congress resolution 105 requested the IUCN Director General to assist the IUCN 
membership in reconnecting people, especially children, and nature as a priority in order to assure 
responsible stewardship of the environment for the generations to come. In 2012, at the World 
Conservation Congress held in Jeju, Republic of Korea, more actions were taken, including a CEO Summit 
and Declaration on Connecting People with Nature which led to the incorporation of the theme of 
“Inspiring a New Generation” at the World Parks Congress in Sydney, Australia in 2014; the subsequent 
Promise of Sydney; and the Inspiring a New Generation North American Summit in 2015. The Members’ 
Assembly at the 2012 IUCN World Conservation Congress also passed resolution 101. That resolution 
endorses the child’s right to nature and a healthy environment. In 2016, at the World Conservation 
Congress held in Hawaii, the IUCN Members’ Assembly passed resolution 85, “Connecting People with 
Nature Globally.” This resolution called for the launch of #NatureForAll within the IUCN’s Programme 
2017-2020, in order to scale up the reach and impact of efforts to connect people from all walks of life 
with nature in order to increase support and action for nature conservation globally. #NatureForAll is 
now a growing global coalition of nearly 300 organisations working together to achieve this goal. 

In 2018, the World Urban Parks Association (www.worldurbanparks.org) issued a policy statement 
on Children, Play and Nature that included a Call to Action to its members worldwide, stating 
“Access to active self-directed play in nature is fundamental to healthy childhood development.” 
The organization urges its members to: 

• Help educate peers and stakeholders on the important role parks play in children’s health
and well-being.

https://natureforall.global/
https://natureforall.global/
http://www.worldurbanparks.org/


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 51 

• Make children and young people a priority in the design and management of urban parks
and open spaces.

• Create more unstructured play opportunities in nature through investments in both
design and programming of parks and open spaces.

• Engage children and caregivers in planning and design of parks and open space, giving
them a voice and seat at the table to better understand their needs and create more
welcoming and inclusive spaces.

Non-Formal International Actions 

The Oakland Declaration 
“The Oakland Declaration on the Vital Role of Nature-Based Learning in Promoting the Well-being of 
People and the Planet” (Children & Nature Network, 2018) was developed by participants at the 
Children & Nature Network’s 2018 International Leadership Summit, and subsequently signed and 
endorsed by people and organisations throughout the world. The Declaration defines nature-based 
learning, identifies its characteristics, and affirms its relevance to basic human needs and the health of 
the planet. In recognizing the critical importance of nature, the Oakland Declaration serves as an 
inspiration for the protection and regeneration of the biosphere on which all life depends. It calls upon 
children, youth, adults, communities, governments, and institutions of education, cultural development, 
health and civic life to come together to cultivate a world where all people have equitable opportunities 
to experience nature as a foundation for learning and wellbeing. 

National and Sub-national Bodies 
National and sub-national governments are beginning to address connectedness with nature in their 
environment-related policies. For example, in Canada, Parks For All: An Action Plan for Canada's Parks 
Community is an innovative and powerful example of national collaboration at all levels of government 
with Indigenous peoples. In June, 2018, Canada's Ministers responsible for national, provincial, and 
territorial parks endorsed the Action Plan, effectively making actions to increase connectedness with 
nature public policy.

2018 marked the release of England’s “A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment.” 
The plan is remarkable on many levels, as official policy of the government with associated funding and 
diverse partner organisations. Focused on the health of the environment, the third of its six policies is 
“connecting people with the environment to improve health and well-being.” Activities they plan to 
undertake to achieve their policy of “connecting people with the environment” include a commitment 
to “encourage children to be close to nature, in and out of school, with particular focus on 
disadvantaged areas,” and to work with “partners to help children and young people from all 
backgrounds to engage with nature and improve the environment (25 Year Environment Plan, 2018).” 

Parks and protected areas are prominent in tourism worldwide and have an important role to play in 
fostering activities that lead to care for the Earth. In 2018, Parks Canada introduced free admission for 
youth aged 17 and under, recognising that “by connecting with nature, youth will gain a better 
understanding of our urgent need to not only protect it, but maintain it for future generations.” 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 52 

The 10-Minute Walk movement aims to ensure that that there is a high quality park or green space 
within 10 minutes of every person in every city across the United States. The initiative has been 
endorsed by more than 200 city mayors, including those from the four largest US cities (New York, Los 
Angeles, Chicago and Houston) in recognition of the health, economic, community-building and 
environmental benefits provided by parks for urban residents. 

Queensland, Australia has developed a series of position statements within the document, “Natureplay 
is Everybody’s Business,” available at www.natureplayqld.org.au. They rest on the position that nature 
play is essential for the healthy development of a child as well as the health of communities and the 
environment. They offer goals, objectives, strategies and policies tied to evidence in a well-documented 
publication that includes this position: Children need nature and nature needs children.” 

At the sub-national level, in two Australian states, Victoria and South Australia, there has been 
leadership at the Ministerial level to integrate health and nature. In Victoria, the Ministers for 
Environment and Health signed the Victorian Memorandum for Health and Nature in 2017 
(https://www.environment.vic.gov.au/biodiversity/victorian-memorandum-for-health-and-nature). This 
coincided with the release of the State’s Biodiversity 2037 Strategy in which one of the two primary 
goals was “Victorians Value Nature.” In South Australia, the Ministers for Environment and Health issued 
a joint Ministerial statement on nature and health in 2016 
(https://www.environment.sa.gov.au/topics/park-management/plans-strategies-and-policies/healthy- 
parks-healthy-people). 

In Victoria, Australia’s Victorian Public Health and Well-being Plan 2015-2019 highlights the importance 
of creating livable neighbourhoods to improve health and well-being, and recognises that interacting 
with nature can have a range of other benefits. The plan notes that parks and open spaces make 
important contributions to healthy, active communities and improved mental health and all local 
governments have produced health and well-being plans, the majority of which recognise the 
importance of outdoor spaces for health and well-being. 

The “Healthy Parks Healthy People” initiative, which was developed under the auspices of Parks Victoria, 
continues to grow in Australia and is being adopted by other state-level and national-level agencies. The 
Healthy Parks Healthy People approach recognises that contact with nature is essential for human 
emotional, physical and spiritual health and well-being, while reinforcing the crucial role that parks and 
protected areas play in nurturing healthy ecosystems. The idea has been the impetus for a growing 
number of alliances at various scales in countries such as Australia (Parks Victoria, New South Wales, 
South Australia); USA (Healthy Parks Healthy People US, US National Park Service; Healthy Parks Healthy 
People East Bay; Healthy Parks Healthy People Maryland); Canada (Healthy Parks Healthy People 
Ontario Parks); New Zealand (Healthy Nature Healthy People); Colombia (Vitamin N Prescription); and 
parts of Europe (Healthy Parks Healthy People Finland, Natural Health Service Scotland). 

http://www.natureplayqld.org.au/
https://www.environment.vic.gov.au/biodiversity/victorian-memorandum-for-health-and-nature
https://www.environment.sa.gov.au/topics/park-management/plans-strategies-and-policies/healthy-parks-healthy-people
https://www.environment.sa.gov.au/topics/park-management/plans-strategies-and-policies/healthy-parks-healthy-people


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 53 

As an example of the growing reach of these efforts, the US National Park Service (US NPS) adopted 
Healthy Parks Healthy People US as an approach in 2011, and is moving into a second phase to integrate 
health promotion more fully into park operations. A set of promising practices has been identified for 
expansion nationally. These practices include community gardens, open streets/cyclovia, smoke-free 
parks, and fitness challenges. One promising practice of note is park prescriptions (Vitamina N, 
Colombia; Park Rx, United States), where doctors and health care providers are referring their patients 
to parks to treat and prevent chronic disease. The US National Park Service leads a national Park Rx Day 
each April during national park week in collaboration with the Institute at the Golden Gate, National 
Recreation and Parks Association, and National Association of State Park Directors. In 2018, sixty-nine 
Park Rx Day events were hosted in 34 states to celebrate the role of parks in promoting people’s health, 
and prominent health sector leaders, including the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the US Surgeon 
General joined in promoting the day through social media and news interviews. 

As another example of leadership within the health sector, the American Academy of Pediatrics adopted 
a policy on nature and play in 2012, re-affirmed it in 2015, and is now on track for revision and adoption 
in 2018. The policy includes a call for pediatricians to “educate parents about the importance of 
children’s play outdoors in nature. Spending unstructured time in nature, surrounded by dirt, trees, 
grass, rocks, flowers, and insects inspires children’s play and offers physical and emotional benefits.” 

Local: Cities and Urban Areas 
With the worldwide trend toward urbanisation, creating nature-rich cities is an essential part of a long- 
term strategy to care for the Earth. To provide the benefits of nature for all children, cities are launching 
initiatives in several areas such as opening up park resources to all residents, and accentuating natural 
features in parks; focusing on the venues where many children spend time, such as early childhood 
centers and afterschool time programs; actively cultivating a new generation of leaders through youth 
stewardship activities; and fulfilling the promise of shared use agreements by adding nature play and 
learning spaces to school grounds and vacant lots. 

For example, The City of Madison, Wisconsin is one of seven cities across the United States 
partnering on the Cities Connecting Children to Nature project (C&NN, 2018), which strives to 
promote equitable nature access to children and families. Its most recent draft comprehensive plan 
includes strategies to provide equitable nature access for its citizens. Similarly, East Dunbartonshire, 
in Scotland, has an Open Space Strategy that sets out standards for the quantity, quality and 
accessibility of open space, including parks, gardens, play areas and nature reserves, for its 
population. A new National Park City initiative aims to establish London, UK as a National Park City 
and to develop a universal charter for National Park Cities that could be adopted elsewhere. Boulder, 
Colorado has had its “Growing Up Boulder” program (www.growingupboulder.org) since 2009 that 
involves preschoolers through high school students in city planning and design. Their projects 
frequently involve nature and mobility. Growing Up Boulder is part of international efforts to create 
“child and youth-friendly cities” that implement the rights outlined in the United Nations Convention 
on the Rights of the Child 
(www.childfriendlycities.org). 

https://www.nps.gov/hphp
http://parkrx.org/
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/129/1/e204
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/129/1/e204
http://imaginemadison.civicomment.org/comprehensive-plan-part-3-4
https://www.eastdunbarton.gov.uk/residents/planning/planning-policy/greenspace
http://www.nationalparkcity.london/faq
http://www.growingupboulder.org/


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 54 

Umbrella organisations and initiatives like Cities Connecting Children to Nature, ICLEI, the Nature of 
Cities, European Union’s Green Week, Green Surge, the World Urban Parks Association, the IUCN Urban 
Alliance, C40 Cities, 880 Cities, National Park City, and Natural Systems and Sustainable Cities are 
providing practical tools and policy guidance to support local initiatives aimed at improving the 
sustainability of urban environments and the quality of life of urban populations. 

In Brazil, a degraded quarry site was transformed into a “naturalised” golf course for the Rio 2016 
Olympic Games, with more than 15,000 native plants transplanted and over 475,000 plants propagated 
from native seeds to stock the new course. The formerly barren space not only attracts golfers, but was 
also quickly recolonized by rare and protected species, including burrowing owls, sandpipers, and 
egrets. 

The Parks for the Planet Forum was launched in 2015 by the Salzburg Global Seminar and IUCN as a 
multi-year effort to “position nature at the very heart of human health and well-being, security and 
prosperity across the planet.” Among its guiding principles, it states that “nature experiences teach 
children to respect, care for, and becomes stewards of the natural world” and that “nature-based 
solutions are cost-effective, high-return investments that provide direct benefits for public health and 
education, improve living conditions, and build resilience to climate and environmental change.” It calls 
for actions to “transform cities for children.” 

In 2017, as part of the Parks for the Planet Forum, 52 experts in urban planning, childhood development, 
conservation, environmental policy, and health gathered for the Parks for the Planet Forum’s meeting 
on The Child in the City: Health, Parks and Play, to assess the evidence and accelerate action for nature 
and health to benefit children in a rapidly urbanising world. The resulting recommendations are: 

• Ensure children of all age, backgrounds, income and abilities have equitable access to nature
and play regularly and in meaningful ways to promote good health and well-being. 

• Embed nature in everyday places used by children, such as schools, backyards, parks,
playgrounds and city streets, to make the city into a natural outdoor classroom.

• Involve children in designing and planning natural spaces for recreation, education,
inspiration and health, to give them ownership and pride in their local communities,
schools and parks.

• Build curiosity, wonder and care for nature in children.
• Protect natural features across cityscapes and create an equitably distributed network of

accessible green and nature-rich spaces that all generations can reach on foot.
• Connect cities with the broader ecosystems in which they are embedded, creating

corridors for people, plants and animals to move safely across the city and into its
surroundings.

• Establish more urban conservation areas to increase access to nature and connect cities
to the broader protected area network.

• Work together through cross sectoral and multi-level partnerships to build an inclusive
culture of health in cities.

http://www.iclei.org/
https://www.thenatureofcities.com/
https://www.thenatureofcities.com/
http://www.eurocities.eu/eurocities/news/EU-Green-Week-calls-for-green-cities-for-a-greener-future-WSPO-AZ2BYN
https://greensurge.eu/
http://worldurbanparks.org/en/
http://www.iucn-urban.org/
http://www.iucn-urban.org/
https://www.c40.org/
https://www.880cities.org/
https://www.cbd.int/doc/c/d8fd/0f2f/1755f512ef36a457b6b65391/sbstta-21-inf-14-en.pdf


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 55 

References 

Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behaviour. Organisational Behaviour and Human Decision 
Processes 50: 179–211. 

Azjen, I.; & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behaviour. Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice Hall. 

Alberta Recreation and Parks Association. (2010). Healthy by nature: Investing in community parks, 
open space and nature education. Edmonton, Alberta: Alberta Recreation and Parks Association. 102 p. 
http://s3.arpaonline.ca/docs/Healthy-by-Nature.pdf 

Anderson, D.; Chiarotto, L.; & Comay, J. (2017). Natural Curiosity 2nd Edition: A resource for educators: 
The importance of Indigenous perspectives in children’s environmental inquiry. The Laboratory School, 
University of Toronto. 

Ardoin, N.M.; Heimlich, J.; Braus, J.; & Merrick, C. (2013). Influencing conservation action: What research 
says about environmental literacy, behaviour and conservation results. National Audubon Society. 

Bamberg, S., & Möser, G. (2006). Twenty years after Hines, Hungerford, and Tomera: A new meta- 
analysis of psycho-social determinants of pro-environmental behaviour. Journal of Environmental 
Psychology 27:14-25. 

Barbaro, N.; & Pickett, S.M. (2016). Mindfully green: Examining the effect of connectedness to nature on 
the relationship between mindfulness and engagement in pro-environmental behaviour. Personality and 
Individual Differences. 

Barford, K., Ejbye-Ernst, N., Mygind, L., & Bentsen, P. (2016). Increased provision of udeskole in Danish 
schools: An updated national population survey. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 20(1), 277-281. 

Barton, J.; Sandercock, G.; Pretty, J.; & Wood, C. (2014). The effect of playground and nature-based 
playtime interventions on physical activity and self-esteem in UK school children. International Journal 
of Environmental Health Research 1–11. 

Becker, C.; Lauterbach, G.; Spengler, S.; Dettweiler, U.; & Mess, F. (2017). Effects of regular classes in 
outdoor education settings: A systematic review of students' learning, social and health dimensions. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 14. 

Beery, T.H. (2013). Nordic in nature: Friluftsliv and environmental connectedness. Environmental 
Education Research 19(1): 94–117. 

Beery, T., Jørgensen, K.A. (2018). Children in nature: Sensory engagement and the experience of 
biodiversity. Environmental Education Research 24(1): 13-25. 

http://s3.arpaonline.ca/docs/Healthy-by-Nature.pdf


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 56 

Bell, J.; Wilson, J.; & Lui, G. (2008). Neighborhood greenness and 2-year changes in body mass index of 
children and youth. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 35(6): 547–553 

Bingley, A. & Milligan, C. (2004). Climbing trees and building dens: Mental health and well-being in 
young adults and the long-term experience of childhood play experience. London, UK: Lancaster 
University, Institute for Health Research. 80p. 

Bonnett M. (2012). Environmental concern, moral education and our place in nature. Journal of Moral 
Education, 41:3, 285-300. 

Braun, T., & Dierkes, P. (2017). Connecting students to nature: How intensity of nature experience and 
student age influence the success of outdoor education programmes. Environmental Education 
Research 23(7): 937-949. 

Broom, C. (2017). Exploring the relations between childhood experiences in nature and young adults’ 
environmental attitudes and behaviours. Australian Journal of Environmental Education, 33(1). 

Burgess, D.J.; & Mayer-Smith, J. (2011). Listening to children: Perceptions of nature. The Journal of 
Natural History Education and Experience, Vol. 5. 

Bureau for Economic Analysis. (2018). Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account, Prototype Estimates, 2012- 
2016. https://www.bea.gov/data/special-topics/outdoor-recreation 

Butchart, S.H.M.; Walpole, M.; Collen, B.; van Strien, A.; Scharlemann, J.P.W.; Almond, R.E.A.; Baillie, 
J.E.M.; Bomhard, B.; Brown, C.; Bruno, J.; Carpenter, K.E.; Carr, G.M.; Chanson, J.; Chenery, A.M.; Csirke, 
J.; Davidson, N.C.; Dentener, F.; Foster, M.; Galli, A.; Galloway, J.N.; Genovesi, P.; Gregory, R.D.; 
Hockings, M.; Kapos, V.; Lamarque, J.; Leverington, F.; Loh, J.; McGeoch, M.A.; McRae, L.; Minasyan, A.; 
Morcillo, M.H.; Oldfield, T.E.E.; Pauly, D.; Quader, S.; Revenga, C.; Sauer, J.R.; Skolnik, B.; Spear, D.; 
Stanwell-Smith, D.; Stuart, S.N.; Symes, A.; Tierney, M.; Tyrrell, T.D.; Vié, J.; & Watson, R. (2010) Global 
biodiversity: Indicators of recent declines. Science 328: 1164–1168. 

Cajete, G. (2015). Indigenous Community: Rekindling the teachings of the seventh fire. Living Justice 
Press. 

Cajete, G. A.; & Williams, D. R. (2018, in Press). Eco-Aesthetics, metaphor, story, and symbolism: An 
Indigenous perspective. A conversation. In Cutter-Mackenzie, A.; Malone, K.; & Hacking, E. (Eds.) 
International research handbook on ChildhoodNature: Assemblages of childhood and nature research. 
New York: Springer. 

Capaldi, C.A.; Dopko, R.L.; & Zelenski, J.M. (2014). The relationship between nature connectedness and 
happiness: A meta-analysis. Frontiers in Psychology, 5: 976. 

Capra, F. (2009, 1975). The Tao of Physics. Shambhala. 

http://www.bea.gov/data/special-topics/outdoor-recreation


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 57 

Cayón, L. (2008). Ide ma: The path of water space, shamanism and person among the Makuna. 
Antipoda: Journal of Anthropology and Archeology, 7: 141-173. 

Ceballos, G., Ehrlich, P.R., & Dirzo, R. (2017). Biological annihilation via the ongoing sixth mass extinction 
signaled by vertebrate population losses and declines. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
114(3)). E6089-E6096. 

Center for Responsible Travel. (2016) The Case for Responsible Travel: Trends & Statistics 2016. 
https://www.responsibletravel.org/whatWeDo/The_Case_for_Responsible_Travel_2016_Final_UPDATE 
D.pdf 

Charles, C. & Senauer-Loge, A. (2010). Children’s contact with the outdoors and nature: A Focus on 
educators and educational settings. Minneapolis: Children & Nature Network. 

Charles, C. & Senauer-Loge, A. (2010). Health benefits to children from contact with the outdoors & 
nature. Minneapolis: Children & Nature Network. 

Charles, C. & Wheeler, K. (2012). Children & nature worldwide: An exploration of children’s experiences 
of the outdoors and nature with associated risks and Bbenefits. Minneapolis: Children & Nature 
Network. 

Charles, Cheryl. (2015). “Love, not loss.” Blog, The New Nature Movement. Minneapolis, MN: Children & 
Nature Network. 

Charles, Cheryl. (2018). “Leading from the Heart of Nature.” In Gray, T. & Mitten, D. (Eds) The Palgrave 
International Handbook of Women and Outdoor Learning. Palgrave Macmillan London. 

Charles, C.; & Louv, R. (2018, In Press). Wild Hope: The Transformative Power of Children Engaging with 
Nature. In In Cutter-Mackenzie, A.; Malone, K.; & Hacking, E. (Eds.) International research handbook on 
ChildhoodNature: Assemblages of childhood and nature research. New York: Springer. 

Chawla, L. 1998. Significant life experiences revisited: A review of research on sources of environmental 
sensitivity. Journal of Environmental Education. 29, 11-21 

Chawla, L. (2006). “Learning to love the natural world enough to protect it,” in Barn nr. 2 2006:57-58. 
Norsk senter for barneforskning. 

Chawla, L., (2009). Growing up green: Becoming an agent of care for the natural world. Journal of 
Developmental Processes, 4(1), 6-23. 

Chawla, L.; & Cushing, D.F. (2007) Education for strategic environmental behaviour. Environmental 
Education Research, 13:4, 437-452. 

https://www.responsibletravel.org/whatWeDo/The_Case_for_Responsible_Travel_2016_Final_UPDATED.pdf
https://www.responsibletravel.org/whatWeDo/The_Case_for_Responsible_Travel_2016_Final_UPDATED.pdf


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 58 

Chawla, L.; & Derr, V. (2012). The development of conservation behaviours in childhood and youth. In 
Clayton, C. (Ed) The Oxford Handbook of Environmental and Conservation Psychology. 

Chawla, L.; & Litt, J. (2013). Improving Health and Wellness through Access to Nature. Policy No. 20137. 
Washington DC:  American Public Health Association. 

Chawla, L.; Keena, K.; Pevec, I.; & Stanley, E. (2014). Green schoolyards as havens from stress and 
resources for resilience in childhood and adolescence. Health & Place 28: 1–13. 

Chawla, L., (2015). Benefits of nature contact for children. Journal of Planning Literature, 30(4), 433-452. 

Cheng, J. C. H., & Monroe, M. C. (2012). Connection to nature children’s affective attitude 
toward nature. Environment and Behaviour, 44(1), 31-49. 

Cheung, L.T.; Lo, A. Y.; Fok, L. 2017: Recreational specialization and ecologically responsible behaviour of 
Chinese birdwatchers in Hong Kong. Journal of Sustainable Tourism 25: 817–831. 

Children & Nature Network (2018). The Oakland Declaration on the vital role of nature-based learning in 
promoting the well-being of people and the planet. Minneapolis: Children & Nature Network. 

Children & Nature Network (2014). Nature Clubs for Families Toolkit. Minneapolis: Children & Nature 
Network. 

Christie, I.; Fernandes, E.; Messerli, H.; &Twining-Ward, L. (2014) Tourism in Africa: Harnessing tourism 
for growth and improved livelihoods. Washington, DC: World Bank. 

Clayton, C.; & Saunders, C. (2012) Introduction: Environmental and conservation psychology. In Clayton, 
C. (Ed) The Oxford Handbook of Environmental and Conservation Psychology. 

Cornell, Joseph. (2018). Personal conversation with Cheryl Charles. 

Cowie, L.J.; Greaves, L.M.; Milfont, T.L.; Houkamau, C.A.; Sibley, C.G. (2016) Indigenous identity and 
environmental values: Do spirituality and political consciousness predict environmental regard among 
Māori? International Perspectives in Psyschology: Research, Practice, Consultation 5(4): 228–244. 

D’Amore, C. (2015). Family Nature Clubs: Creating the Conditions for Social and Environmental 
Connection and Care. Ann Arbor: Proquest LLC. 

D’Amore, C.; Charles, C.; & Louv, R. (2015). Thriving through nature: Fostering children’s executive 
function skills. Minneapolis: Children & Nature Network. 

D’Amore, C.; & Chawla, L. (In Press). Significant life experiences that connect children with nature: A 
research review and applications to a family nature club. In Amy Cutter-Mackenzie, A.; Malone, K; & 
Hacking, E.B. (Eds.) International Research Handbook on ChildhoodNature. Melbourne: Springer. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 59 

D’Amore, C.; & Chawla, L. (2017). Many children in the woods: Applying principles of community-based 
social marketing to a family nature club. Ecopsychology, Vol. 9; No. 4. 

Department of Environment, Food & Rural Affairs. 2018: A green future: Our 25 year plan to improve 
the environment. London: Her Majesty’s Government. 

Department of Health and Human Services. 2015: Victorian public health and well-being plan 2015– 
2019. Melbourne: Victorian Government. 69p. https://cotavic.org.au/wp- 
content/uploads/2015/09/Victoria-Public-Health-and-Wellbeing-Plan-2015-2019.pdf 

Department of Planning, Community & Economic Development. 2018: Comprehensive plan (May 1, 
2018 draft). Madison: City of Madison. http://imaginemadison.civicomment.org/comprehensive-plan- 
part-3-4 

Dittmer, L., Mugagga, F., Metternich, A., Schweizer-Ries, P., Asiimwe, G., Riemer, M., (2018). We can 
keep the fire burning: Building action competence through environmental justice education in Uganda 
and Germany. Local Environment, 23(2), 144-157. 

Dudley, N.; Ali, N.; MacKinnon, K. (2017). Natural solutions: Protected areas helping to meet sustainable 
development goals. IUCN World Commission on Protected Areas Briefing Note. 
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/natural_solutions_-_sdgs_final_2.pdf 

East Dunbartonshire Council. 2015: Open space strategy 2015-2020. Kirkintilloch: East Dunbartonshire 
Council. 88p. https://www.eastdunbarton.gov.uk/residents/planning/planning-policy/greenspace 

Ehrenfeld, J. R.; & Hoffman, A.J. (2013). Flourishing: A frank conversation about sustainability. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 

Faber-Taylor, A.; & Kuo, F. (2009). Children with attention deficits concentrate better after walk in the 
park. Journal of Attention Disorders 12(5): 402–409. 

Faber-Taylor, A.; Kuo, F.; & Sullivan, W. (2001). Coping with ADD: The surprising connection to green 
play settings. Environment and Behavior 33: 54–77. 

Faculty of Public Health and Natural England. (2010). Great outdoors: How our natural health service 
uses green space to improve wellbeing. Briefing Statement. 
http://www.champspublichealth.com/writedir/9ee3FPH%20green%20space%20briefing.pdf 

Gammage, Bill. (2011) The biggest estate on Earth : How Aborigines made Australia. Allen & Unwin, 
ISBN 978-1-74237-748-3 

Geng, L; Xu, J.; Ye, L; Zhou, W; & Zhou, K. (2015) Connections with nature and environmental 
behaviours. PLOS ONE. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127247 

https://cotavic.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Victoria-Public-Health-and-Wellbeing-Plan-2015-2019.pdf
https://cotavic.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Victoria-Public-Health-and-Wellbeing-Plan-2015-2019.pdf
http://imaginemadison.civicomment.org/comprehensive-plan-part-3-4
http://imaginemadison.civicomment.org/comprehensive-plan-part-3-4
https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/natural_solutions_-_sdgs_final_2.pdf
https://www.eastdunbarton.gov.uk/residents/planning/planning-policy/greenspace
http://www.champspublichealth.com/writedir/9ee3FPH%20green%20space%20briefing.pdf


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 60 

Giusti et al.(2018). A framework to assess where and how children connect to nature. Frontiers in 
Psychology 8 (January). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02283 

Gladwell, V.; Brown, D.; Wood, C.; Sandercock, G; & Barton, J. (2013). The great outdoors: How a green 
exercise environment can benefit all. Extreme Physiology & Medicine 2:3. 

Goralnik L, Nelson M. 2015. Empathy and agency in the Isle Royale field philosophy experience. Journal 
of Sustainability Education Vol. 10, 

Goralnik, L.; Nelson, M.P. 2011: Framing a philosophy of environmental action: Aldo Leopold, John Muir, 
and the importance of community. Journal of Environmental Education 42(3): 181–192. 

Goralnik L, Nelson M. 2017. Field philosophy: Environmental learning and moral development in Isle 
Royale National Park. Environmental Education Research, 23:5, 687-707, DOI: 
10.1080/13504622.2015.1074661. 

Gratani et al.. (2016). Indigenous environmental values as human values. Cogent Social Sciences, 2: 
1185811. 

Green, C. (2018). Children's environmental identity development: Negotiating inner and outer tensions 
in natural world socialization. New York, NY: Peter Lang. 

Greffrath, G.; Meyer, C.; Strydom, H.; & Ellis, S. (2011). Centre-based and expedition-based (wilderness) 
adventure experiential learning personal effectiveness: An explorative enquiry. Leisure Studies 30(3): 
345–364. 

Grimm, N.B.; Faeth, S.H.; Golubiewski, N.E.; Redman, C.L.; Wu, J.; Bai, X.; Briggs, J.M. 2008: Global 
change and the ecology of cities. Science 319: 756–760. 

Hall, Gerard, and Joan Hendriks, eds. (2012) Dreaming a new Earth. Melbourne, VIC: Mosaic Press. 

Halpenny, E. 2010: Pro-environmental behaviours and park visitors: The effect of place attachment. 
Journal of Environmental Psychology 30: 409–421. 

Harbrow, M.A. (In press). Visitors as advocates: aAreview of the links between participation in outdoor 
recreation and support for conservation and the environment. Department of Conservation, Wellington, 
New Zealand. 

Hartig, T.; Mitchell, R.; de Vries, S.; & Frumkin, H. (2014). Nature and health. Annual Review of Public 
Health, 35: 207-228. 

Hinds, J.; Sparks, P. (2009) Investigating environmental identity, well-being and meaning. Ecopsychology 
1(4): 181–186. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02283


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 61 

Hines, J.M., Hungerford, H.R., & Tomera, A.N. (1986/87) Analysis and synthesis of research on 
responsible environmental behaviour: A meta-analysis. Journal of Environmental Education, 18, 1-8. 

Hsu, S-H. 2017: Significant life experiences affect environmental action: A critical review of Taiwanese 
research. Japanese Journal of Environmental Education 26(4): 51-56. 

Hungerford, H. R., & Volk, T. L. 1990: Changing learner behaviour through environmental education. 
Journal of Environmental Education 21: 8-22. 

Hvenegaard, G.T. 2002: Birder specialization differences in conservation involvement, demographics, 
and motivations. Human Dimensions of Wildlife 7: 21–36. 

IUCN Red List Committee. (2013). The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species™ Strategic Plan 2013 - 2020. 
Version 1.0. Gland: IUCN. 

International Union for the Conservation of Nature. (2011). Love, not loss. Gland: IUCN. 

Jazaieri, H.; McGonigal, K.; Jinpa, T.; Doty, J.R.; Gross, J.J.; & Goldin, P.R. (2013). A randomized controlled 
trial of compassion cultivation training: Effects on mindfulness, affect, and emotion regulation. 
Motivation and Emotion. doi:10.1007/s110310139368z 

Jensen, E. A., Moss, A., & Gusset, M. (2017). Quantifying long-term impact of zoo and aquarium visits on 
biodiversity-related learning outcomes. Zoo Biology, 36(4), 294-297. 

Jordan, K.; & Kristjánsson, K. (2017). Sustainability, virtue ethics, and the virtue of harmony with nature. 
Environmental Education Research, Vol. 23, No. 9, 1205–1229, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2016.1157681 

Jung, T. H. & and Metcalf, L. (2017) The value of groups in driving sustainability action in organisations, 
ARIES white paper. 

Kals, E.; Schumacher, D.; Montada, L. (1999) Emotional affinity toward nature as a motivational basis to 
protect nature. Environment and Behaviour 31(2): 178–202. 

Kamitsis, I., & Francis, A. J. (2013). Spirituality mediates the relationship between engagement with 
nature and psychological wellbeing. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 36, 136-143. 

Kaplan, R.; & Kaplan, S. (1989). The Experience of nature: A psychological perspective. Cambridge, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 360p. 

Kellert, S.R.; Case, D.J.; Escher, D.; Witter, D.J.; Mikels-Carrasco, J.; & Seng, P.T. (2017) The nature of 
Americans: Disconnections and recommendations for reconnection national report. 
NatureofAmericans.org 

Kellert, S. R. (2002). Experiencing nature: Affective, cognitive and evaluative development in children. In 
Kahn, Jr., P., & Kellert, S.R. (2002). Children & Nature: Psychological, Sociocultural and Evolutionary 
Investigations. MIT Press. 

Kellert, S. R. & Wilson, E.O. (1993). The biophilia hypothesis. Washington D. C: Island Press. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2016.1157681


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 62 

Klöckner, C.A. (2013). A comprehensive model of the psychology of environmental behaviour: A meta- 
analysis. Global Environmental Change 23(50): 1028-1038. 

Kondo, M.; Hohl, B.; Han, S.; & Branas, C. (2016). Effects of greening and community reuse of vacant lots 
on crime. Urban Studies 53(15): 3279–3295. 

Korpela, K.; Kytta, M.; & Hartig, T. (2002). Restorative experience, self-regulation, and children’s special 
place preferences. Journal of Environmental Psychology 22: 387–398. 

Kuo, F. (2010). Parks and other green environments: Essential components of a healthy human habitat. 
Washington D.C.: National Recreation and Park Association. 

Kuo, F.; & Sullivan, W. (2001). Aggression and violence in the inner city: Effects of environment via 
mental fatigue. Environment and Behavior 33(4): 543–571. 

Kuo, F.; Sullivan, W.; Coley, R.; & Brunson, L. (1998). Fertile ground for community: Inner-city 
neighborhood common spaces. American Journal of Community Psychology 26(6): 823–851. 

Kriyananda, S. (1998). The Hindu Way of Awakening. Crystal Clarity Publishers. 

Kwaymullina, A. (2005). Seeing the light: Aboriginal law, learning and sustainable living in country. 
Indigenous Law Bulletin 12. 

Lane, P., Jr.; Bopp, J.; Bopp, M.; Brown, L.; & Elders. (1984). The sacred tree. Twin Lakes, WI: Lotus Press. 

Li, D; & Sullivan, W. (2016). Impact of views to school landscapes on recovery from stress and mental 
fatigue. Landscape and Urban Planning 148: 149–158. 

Lin, B.; Fuller, R.; Bush, R.; Gaston, K. (2014). Opportunity or orientation? Who uses urban parks and 
why. PLoS ONE. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0087422 

Louv, R. (2008, 2005). Last child in the woods: Saving our children from nature-deficit disorder. Chapel 
Hill, NC: Algonquin Books. 

Louv, R. (2012). The nature principle: Reconnecting with life in a virtual age. Chapel Hill, NC: Algonquin 
Books. 

Lumber, R., Richardson, M., & Sheffield, D. (2017). Beyond knowing nature: Contact, emotion, 
compassion, meaning, and beauty are pathways to nature connection. PLoS One, 12 (5). 

Luther, M. and Gruehn, D. (2001). Putting a price on urban green spaces. Landscape 
Design, No. 303, pp. 23 – 25. 

Malinowski, P. (2017). Mindfulness. In S. Schneider & M. Velmans (Eds.), The Blackwell Companion to 
Consciousness, 2nd edition (pp. 203-216). Oxford: Wiley & Son. 

Maller, C.; Townsend, M.; Pryor, A.; Brown, P.; & St Leger, S. (2005). Healthy nature healthy people: 
Contact with nature as an upstream health promotion intervention for populations. Health Promotion 
International 21(1): 45–54. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0087422


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 63 

Manfredo, M.J.; Yuan, S.M.; & McGuire, F.A. (1992). The influence of attitude accessibility on attitude- 
behaviour relationships: implications for recreation research. Journal of Leisure Research 24(2): 157– 
170. 

Matsuoka,R. H. (2010). Student performance and high school landscapes: Examining the links. 
Landscape and Urban Planning 97(4): 273–282. 

Mayer, F.S.; & Frantz, C.M. (2004). The connectedness to nature scale: A measure of individuals’ feeling 
in community with nature. Journal of Environmental Psychology 24: 503–515. 

McCurdy, L. E.; Winterbottom, K. E.; Mehta, S. S.; & Roberts, J. R. (2010). Using nature and outdoor 
activity to improve children’s health. Current Problems in Pediatric and Adolescent Health Care 40(5): 
102–117. 

McFarlane, B.L.; & Boxall, P.C. (1996). Participation in wildlife conservation by birdwatchers. Human 
Dimensions of Wildlife 1(3): 1–14. 

McKenzie-Mohr, Doug. (2011). Fostering sustainable behaviour: An introduction to community-based 
social marketing. New Society Publishers. 

Monroe, M. (2003). Two avenues for encouraging conservation behaviours. Human Ecology Review, Vol. 
10, No. 2. 

Mooney, P.; & Nicell, P. (1992.) The importance of exterior environments for Alzheimer residents: 
Effective care and risk management. Healthcare Management Forum 5(2): 23–29. 

Moss, A., Jensen, E., & Gusset, M. (2014). Conservation: Zoo visits boost biodiversity literacy. Nature, 
508(7495), 186. 

Moss, A., Jensen, E., & Gusset, M. (2015). Evaluating the contribution of zoos and aquariums to Aichi 
biodiversity target 1. Conservation Biology, 29(2), 537-544. 

Moss, A., Jensen, E., & Gusset, M. (2017). Evaluating the impact of a global biodiversity education 
campaign on zoo and aquarium visitors. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 15(5), 243-247. 

Moss, A., Jensen, E., & Gusset, M. (2017). Probing the link between biodiversity-related knowledge and 
self-reported pro-conservation behaviour in a global survey of zoo visitors. Conservation Letters, 10(1), 
33-40. 

#NatureForAll. (2017). The #NatureForAll playbook: An action guide for inspiring love of nature. Gland: 
The International Union for Conservation of Nature World Commission on Protected Areas and The 
International Union for Conservation Commission on Education and Communication. 

Nisbet, E. K., Zelenski, J. M., & Murphy, S.A. (2009). The nature relatedness scale: Linking individuals’ 
connection with nature to environmental concern and behaviour. Environment and Behaviour, 41, 715– 
740. 

Obradovich, N., & Guenther, S. (2016) Collective responsibility amplifies mitigation behaviours. Climatic 
Change, 137(1): 307-319. 



HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 64 

Oh, C.; Ditton, R.B. (2006) Using recreation specialization to understand multi-attribute management 
preferences. Leisure Sciences 28: 369–384. 

Oh, C.; Ditton, R.B. (2008) Using recreation specialization to understand conservation support. Journal of 
Leisure Research 40(4): 556–573. 

Otto, S.; & Pensini, P. (2017). Nature-based environmental education of children: Environmental 
knowledge and connectedness to nature, together, are related to ecological behaviour. Global 
Environmental Change, 47, 88-94. 

Ottosson J.; & Grahn P. (2005) A comparison of leisure time spent in a garden with leisure time spent 
indoors on measures of restoration in residents in geriatric care. Landscape Research 30(1):23-55. 

Outdoor Foundation. (2018). Outdoor participation report. Washington, D.C.: The Outdoor Foundation. 

Panelli, R.; Tipa, G. (2007). Placing well-being: A Māori case study of cultural and environmental 
specificity. EcoHealth 4: 445–460. 

Park, C.W.; MacInnis, D.J. (2006). What’s in and what’s out: Questions on the boundaries of the attitude 
construct. Journal of Consumer Research 33: 16–18. 

Parks Canada. (2014, on behalf of the Canadian Parks Council). Connecting Canadians with 
Nature: An investment in the well-being of our citizens. Ottawa, ON: Parks Canada. 

Parks Canada. (2017). Government of Canada announces free admission to Parks Canada places for 
youth 17 and under starting in 2018. https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/government-of-canada- 
announces-free-admission-to-parks-canada-places-for-youth-17-and-under-starting-in-2018- 
661055323.html 

Pathway to Stewardship & Kinship. (2017). Pathway to stewardship & kinship: Raising healthy children 
for a healthy planet. https://campkawartha.ca/pathway-to-stewardship/ 

Perey, R. (2016) Ecological Imaginaries: Organising Sustainability. CBS Press, DK 

Pergams, O.R.W.; & Zaradic, P.A. (2008). Evidence for a fundamental and pervasive shift away from 
nature-based recreation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105 (7) 2295-2300. 

Piff, P.K.; Dietze, P.; Feinberg, M.; Stancato, D.M.; Keltner, D. (2015). Awe, the small self, and prosocial 
behaviour. Journal of Personal Social Psychology, 108(6): 883-99. 

Postma, D.W.; & Smeyers, P. (2012) Like a swallow, moving forward in circles: on the future dimension 
of environmental care and education, Journal of Moral Education, 41:3, 399-412 

Parks Canada. (2017, on behalf of the Canadian Parks Council and Canadian Parks and Recreation Association.) 
Parks for all: An action plan for Canada's parks community. Ottawa, ON: Parks Canada.

https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/government-of-canada-announces-free-admission-to-parks-canada-places-for-youth-17-and-under-starting-in-2018-661055323.html
https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/government-of-canada-announces-free-admission-to-parks-canada-places-for-youth-17-and-under-starting-in-2018-661055323.html
https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/government-of-canada-announces-free-admission-to-parks-canada-places-for-youth-17-and-under-starting-in-2018-661055323.html


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 65 

Peacock, J.; Hine, R.; & Pretty, J. (2007). Got the blues, then find some greenspace: The mental health 
benefits of green exercise activities and green Ccre. Mind Report 1.0, Feb. 

Piccininni, C.; Michaelson, V.; Janssen, I.; & Pickett, W. (2018). Outdoor play and nature connectedness 
as potential correlates of internalized mental health symptoms among Canadian adolescents. Preventive 
Medicine 112: 168-175. 

Pretty, J.; Peacock, J.; Sellens, M.; & Griffin, M. (2005). The mental and physical health outcomes of 
green exercise. International Journal of Environmental Health Research 15(5): 319–337. 

Project Dirt. (2018). The impact of outdoor learning and playtime at school – and beyond: A summary of 
the survey findings conducted for Outdoor Classroom Day 2018. https://outdoorclassroomday.com/wp- 
content/uploads/2018/05/FINAL-Project-Dirt-Survey-Outdoor-Play-and-Learning-at-School-2018- 
15.05.18.pdf 

Ramkissoon, H.; Smith, L.D.G.; & Weiler, B. (2013). Testing the dimensionality of place attachment and 
its relationships with place satisfaction and pro-environmental behaviours: a structural equation 
modelling approach. Tourism Management 36: 552–566. 

Richardson, M., McEwan, K., Maratos, F. & Sheffield, D. (2016). Joy and calm: How an evolutionary 
functional model of affect regulation informs positive emotions in nature. Evolutionary Psychological 
Science. Doi:10.1007/s40806-016-0065-5 

Richardson, M., Maspero, M., Golightly, D., Sheffield, D., Staples, V., & Lumber, R. (2017). Nature: a new 
paradigm for well-being and ergonomics. Ergonomics, 60(2), 292-305. 

Richardson, M. & Sheffield, D. (2017). Three good things in nature: Noticing nearby nature brings 
sustained increases in connection with nature. Psyecology, 8(1), 1-32. 

Richardson, M.; Cormack, A.; McRobert, L; & Underhill, R. (2016). 30 days wild: Development and 
evaluation of a large-scale nature engagement campaign to improve well-being. PLoS one, 11(2), 
E0149777. 

Richardson, M.; McEwan, K.; & Garip, G. (2018). 30 days wild: Who benefits most? Journal of Public 
Mental Health, 17(3), 95-104. 

Richardson, M.; & McEwan, K. (2018). 30 days wild and the relationships between engagement with 
nature’s beauty, nature connectedness and well-being. Frontiers in Psychology, 9. 

Richardson, M., Hallam, J. & Lumber, R. (2015). One thousand good things in nature: The aspects of 
nature that lead to increased nature connectedness. Environmental Values, 24 (5), 603-619. 

Richardson, M., Sheffield, D., Harvey, C. & Petronzi (2016). A Report for the Royal Society for the 
Protection of Birds (RSPB): The Impact of Children’s Connection to Nature. Derby: College of Life and 
Natural Sciences, University of Derby 

https://outdoorclassroomday.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/FINAL-Project-Dirt-Survey-Outdoor-Play-and-Learning-at-School-2018-15.05.18.pdf
https://outdoorclassroomday.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/FINAL-Project-Dirt-Survey-Outdoor-Play-and-Learning-at-School-2018-15.05.18.pdf
https://outdoorclassroomday.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/FINAL-Project-Dirt-Survey-Outdoor-Play-and-Learning-at-School-2018-15.05.18.pdf


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 66 

Riemer, M., Voorhees, C., Dittmer, L., Alisat, S., Alam, N., Sayal, R., Bidisha, S.H., De Souza, A., Lynes, J., 
Metternich, A., Mugagga, F., Schweizer-Ries, P. (2016). The Youth Leading Environmental Change 
project: A mixed-method longitudinal study across six countries. Ecopsychology, 8(3), 174-187. 

Robbins, J. (2018). Native knowledge: What ecologists are learning from indigenous people. Yale 
Environment 360, 2018. https://e360.yale.edu/features/native-knowledge-what-ecologists-are-learning- 
from-indigenous-people. 

RSPB. (2013). Connecting with Nature. RSPB. Available online at: 
http://www.rspb.org.uk/Images/connecting-with-nature_tcm9-354603.pdf 

Sandell, K; & Öhman, J. (2010). Educational potentials of encounters with nature: reflections from a 
Swedish outdoor perspective, Environmental Education Research, 16:1, 113-132, 
DOI:10.1080/13504620903504065 

Schultz, P.W. (2002). Inclusion with nature: the psychology of human-nature relations. Pp. 61–78 in 
Schmuck, P.; Schultz, P.W. (Eds): Psychology of sustainable development. Springer US, New York. 337 p. 

Schwartz, S. H. (1977). Normative influences on altruism. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental 
social psychology (pp. 221–279). San Diego: Academic Press. 

Scopelliti, M., Carrus, G., Adinolfi, C., Suarez, G., Colangelo, G., Lafortezza, R., et al. (2016). Staying in 
touch with nature and well-being in different income groups: the experience of urban parks in Bogotá. 
Landscape and Urban Planning 148: 139-148.gs using remote sensing. PLoS ONE 9(10): e108548 

Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. 2014: Global biodiversity outlook 4. Montréal. 
155p. https://www.cbd.int/gbo/gbo4/publication/gbo4-en-hr.pdf 

Selby, D. (2017). Education for sustainable development, nature and vernacular learning. CEPS Journal, 
Vol. 7, No. 1. 

Seto, K.C.; Güneralp, B.; & Hutrya, L.R. (2012). Global forecasts of urban expansion to 2030 and direct 
impacts on biodiversity and carbon pools. PNAS 109(40): 16083–16088. 

Sherer, P. (2006). Why America needs more city parks and open space. San Francisco: The Trust for 
Public Land. 33p. http://www.eastshorepark.org/benefits_of_parks%20tpl.pdf 

Sobel, D. (Ed). (2016). Nature preschools and forest kindergartens: The handbook for outdoor learning. 
St. Paul: Redleaf Press. 

Sobel, D. (2008). Childhood and nature: Design principles for educators. Portland, ME.: Stenhouse 
Publishers. 

St. Antoine, S.; Charles, C.; & Louv, R. (2012). Together in nature: Pathways to a stronger, closer family. 
Minneapolis: Children & Nature Network. 

http://www.rspb.org.uk/Images/connecting-with-nature_tcm9-354603.pdf
http://www.cbd.int/gbo/gbo4/publication/gbo4-en-hr.pdf
http://www.eastshorepark.org/benefits_of_parks%20tpl.pdf


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 67 

Stellar, J.E.; Gordon, A.M.; Piff, P.K.; Cordaro, D.; Anderson C.L.; Bai, Y. Maruskin, L.A.; Keltner. (2017). 
Self-transcendent emotions and their social functions: Compassion, gratitude and awe bind us to others 
through prosociality. Sage Journals, Vol. 9, 3. 

Stedman, R.C. (2002). Toward a social psychology of place. Predicting behaviour from place-based 
cognitions, attitude and identity. Environment and Behaviour 34(5): 561–581. 

Steffen, W.; et al. (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. 
Science, Vol. 347, Issue 6223. 

Stern, P.C.; Dietz, T. (1994). The value basis of environmental concern. Journal of Social Issues 50(3): 65– 
84. 

Stern, P.C. (2000). Toward a coherent theory of environmentally significant behaviour. Society for the 
Psychological Study of Social Issues, Vol. 56, No. 3, 407-424. 

Strong, WB; Maline, R; Blimkie, C; Daniels, S; Dishman, R; Gutin, B; et al. (2005) Evidence-based physical 
activity for school-aged youth. J Pediatr 146 (6):732-7. 

Tam, K. P. (2013). Concepts and measures related to connection to nature: Similarities and 
differences. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 34, 64-78. 

Tanner, T. (1980). Significant life experiences: A new research area in environmental education. 
Retrieved at http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00958964.1980.9941386 

Tarrant, M.A.; & Green, G.T. (1999). Outdoor recreation and the predictive validity of environmental 
attitudes. Leisure Sciences 21: 17–30. 

Thapa, B.; Graefe, A.R.; & Meyer, L.A. (2006). Specialization and marine based environmental behaviours 
among SCUBA divers. Journal of Leisure Research 38(4): 601–615. 

Thapa, B. (2010). The mediation effect of outdoor recreation participation on environmental attitude- 
behaviour correspondence. Journal of Environmental Education 41(3): 133–150. 

Tonge, J.; Ryan, M.M.; Moore, S.A.; & Beckley, L.E. (2015). The effect of place attachment on pro- 
environment behavioural intentions of visitors to coastal natural area tourist destinations. Journal of 
Travel Research 54(6): 730–743. 

Townsend, M.; Henderson-Wilson, C.; Warner, E.; & Weiss, L. (2015). Healthy Parks, Healthy People: The 
state of the evidence 2015. Deakin University. 

Tsunetsugu, Y.; Park, B.; & Miyazaki, Y. (2010). Trends in research related to “Shinrin yoku” (taking in the 
forest atmosphere or forest bathing) in Japan. Environmental Health and Preventive Medicine 15: 27– 
37. 

Ulrich, R. (1984). View through a window may influence recovery from surgery. Science 224: 420–421 

http://journals.sagepub.com/author/Stellar%2C%2BJennifer%2BE
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00958964.1980.9941386


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 68 

United Nations. (2017). World urbanization prospects: The 2018 revision. United Nations, Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. New York. https://population.un.org/wup/ 

Urban Land Institute. (2018). Parks for everyone: ULI gets behind the 10-minute walk campaign. 
https://americas.uli.org/research/centers-initiatives/10-minute-walk-campaign/ 

Vaske, J.J.; Kobrin, K.C. (2001). Place attachment and environmentally responsible behaviour. Journal of 
Environmental Education 32(4): 16–21. 

Wang, X.; Geng, L.; Zhou, K.; Ye, L.; Ma, Y.; & Zhang, S. (2016). Mindful learning can promote 
connectedness to nature: Implicit and explicit evidence. Consciousness and Cognition 44: 1–7. 

Wang, G.; Macera, C.A.; Scudder-Soucie, B.; Schmid, T.; Pratt, M., Buchner, D. (2005). A cost-benefit 
analysis of physical activity using bike/pedestrian trails. Health Promot Pract. 6:174 –179. 

Wells, N.M.; & Lekies, K.S. (2006). Nature and the life course: Pathways from childhood nature 
experiences to adult environmentalism. Children, Youth and Environments, Vol. 16, No. 1, pp.1-24. 

Weinstein, N.; Przybylski, A.; & Ryan, R. (2009). Can nature make us more caring? Effects of immersion in 
nature on intrinsic aspirations and generosity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 35: 1315–1329. 

Williams, D. (2015). Regenerative Hope: Pedagogy of action and agency in the learning gardens. The 
Journal of Sustainability Education. 

World Health Organisation. (2017) Preventing non-communicable diseases (NCDs) by reducing 
environmental risk factors. World Health Organisation. 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/258796/WHO-FWC-EPE-17.01-eng.pdf?sequence=1 

World Health Organisation; Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. 2015: Connecting 
global priorities: Biodiversity and human health: A state of knowledge report. World Health Organisation 
Publications. Switzerland. 344p. https://www.cbd.int/health/SOK-biodiversity-en.pdf. 

World Health Organisation. (2004). Global strategy on diet, physical activity and health: What can be 
done to fight the childhood obesity epidemic? 
http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/childhood_what_can_be_done/en/ 

World Tourism Organisation (2017). Tourism and the sustainable development goals: Journey to 2030. 
Madrid: UNWTO. 114p. https://www.e-unwto.org/doi/pdf/10.18111/9789284419401 

Wright, P.; & Matthews, C. (2015). Building a culture of conservation: Research findings and research 
priorities on connecting people to nature in parks. Parks Journal 21 (2): 11-24. 

https://population.un.org/wup/
https://americas.uli.org/research/centers-initiatives/10-minute-walk-campaign/
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/258796/WHO-FWC-EPE-17.01-eng.pdf?sequence=1
http://www.cbd.int/health/SOK-biodiversity-en.pdf
http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/childhood_what_can_be_done/en/
https://www.e-unwto.org/doi/pdf/10.18111/9789284419401


HOME TO US ALL © 2018 Children & Nature Network 69 

Wu, C.-D.; McNeely, E.; Cedeno-Laurent, J.; Pan, W.-C.; Adamkiewicz, G.; Dominici, F.; et al. (2014). 
Linking student performance in Massachusetts elementary schools with the “greenness” of school 
surroundings using remote sensing. PLoS ONE 9(10): e108548 

Young, Jon. 8 shields connection modeling http://8shields.org/ 

Zelenski, J.M.; Dopko, R.L.; & Capaldi, C.A. (2015). Cooperation is in our nature: Nature exposure may 
promote cooperative and environmentally sustainable behavior. Journal of Environmental Psychology 
42: 24-31. 

Zylstra, M.J., Knight , A.T., Esler, K.J., Le Grange, L.L.L., (2014). Connectedness as a core conservation 
concern: An interdisciplinary review of theory and a call for practice. Springer Science Reviews, 
2(1), 119-143. 

http://8shields.org/

	This is a story. It is a story about the relationship between people and the living Earth. It is the most urgent, compelling, and inspiring story to be shared today. It is a story that will define the kind of planet that future generations will inheri...
	Many human beings are living with little direct, intentional and conscious experience of the beauty and complexity of the Earth’s living systems. The realization that humans are just one part of this interdependent and interconnected web of life has b...
	Why? It’s Time to Heal
	The Story of the Lost Girl
	What Do We Know? What Does the Evidence Tell Us? Summary Statements
	Indigenous Wisdom: We Are One
	Ancient Traditions: We Are One
	Contemporary Science: We Are One
	Exposure to Nature Contributes to Care for Ourselves and Others
	Bonding with Nature Contributes to Care for the Earth
	There Are Adult Pathways to Conservation Behaviours
	Nature Connectedness Is Vital to Conservation Action
	Mindfulness and Connectedness to Nature
	Effective Program and Personal Characteristics
	From Individual to Aggregate: The Issue of Scale
	Nature Connection through Education
	What We Know from the Evidence*

	What Don’t We Know? Where Are the Gaps?
	What Don’t We Know? Where Are the Gaps?  Summary Statements
	A Review of the Gaps

	What Can We Do?
	Implement Key Recommendations for Policy and Practice
	Overcome Barriers to Connectedness
	Connect to Nature Where We Live, Work, Learn and Play
	Design for Biophilic Values to Connect People with Nature
	Specific Recommendations for Natural Resource Professionals and Policymakers (Excerpted and adapted from Harbrow, in press)
	Develop your audiences’ personal and emotional connections with nature, which may be associated with a place or a particular activity. Focus on:
	Appeal to people who may lack a strong connection to particular natural areas, e.g., infrequent or first-time visitors and tourists, by offering:


	APPENDIX 1
	Education, and Society
	Nature Education in Schooling
	Nature Connection throughout Society


	APPENDIX 2
	Policies and Practices to Connect People with Nature
	International
	National and Sub-national Bodies
	Local: Cities and Urban Areas


	References

	Untitled



