









































January 2024




01 INTRODUCTION

THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY
We adapt to local conditions and needs

THE NESTLÉ MODEL 
We are guided by agroecological principles and practices

SETTING THE SCENE 
Why do we need to move towards regeneration?

WHAT WILL SUCCESS LOOK LIKE?
Our ambition

a.	 Guiding principles 
i.	 Pragmatic and adjusted to local conditions
ii.	 Results-focused, driven by measurable outcomes
iii.	 Beneficial to the farmers
iv.	 Collaborative and science-based
v.	 Carried out at landscape level wherever relevant

vi.	 Tailored to smallholder needs
b.	 The roadmap
c.	 Tools and metrics

i.	 Farm assessment tool
ii.	 Grading system
iii.	 KPIs & Dashboard
iv.	 Going beyond

a.	 The holistic model
b.	 Soil: a nexus to protect and restore
c.	 The interconnection of practices and benefits - feed the soil, not the plant
d.	 Main regenerative practices

1.	 Cover crops	
2.	 Diversified crop rotation 
3.	 Mulching & crop residues cover
4.	 Minimum tillage
5.	 Organic fertilizers
6.	 Irrigation technology
7.	 Riparian buffers
8.	 Integrated nutrient management
9.	 Intercropping

10.	 Agroforestry & silvo-pastoral systems
11.	 Hedgerows, green buffers
12.	 Integrated pest management & bio-controls
13.	 Precision farming
14.	 Manure storage & process
15.	 Herd management
16.	 Integrated pasture management & grazing strategies
17.	 Landscape-scale collaboration

04

02

05

03

a.	 Gradual degradation of natural resources linked to conventional  
        farming practices

i.	 Soils & soil health
ii.	 Water
iii.	 Biodiversity

b.	 Climate change and the environmental impact of some  
        conventional agricultural practices
c.	 Population growth, land use change and the importance of yield



PURPOSE OF THIS DOCUMENT
The following Framework describes Nestlé’s 
corporate vision for agriculture as a central 
building block for more regenerative food 
systems. 'Regenerative agriculture' is defined 
as an outcome-based farming approach that 
protects and improves soil health, biodiversity, 
climate, and water resources while supporting 
farming business development, according to 
the Sustainable Agriculture Initiative Platform. 

We aim to clearly frame the key challenges 
that must be addressed through various 
interventions and to highlight major 
opportunities to change the way we grow food.

This Framework is meant to be a playbook, 
containing common principles and techniques 
that may be used in different combinations, 
depending on specific local conditions and 

crop type. It is not meant to be a rulebook. 
For certain ingredients, including dairy and 
coffee, we have also issued more detailed 
guidelines. 

In addition to defining our approach to 
regenerative agriculture, this document also 
describes our implementation strategy at 
market level. It considers the main drivers for 
local initiatives aimed at transitioning to new 
farming practices.

Its primary audience is Nestlé’s internal 
agriculture and sourcing community; 
however, it can also be used with our 
suppliers to explain our approach and 
expectations.



For over 20 years at Nestlé, our “Sustainable 
Agriculture Initiative” (SAIN) has enabled us to 
support hundreds of thousands of farmers to 
introduce more sustainable practices on their 
farmlands. 

Through SAIN, we provided technical 
and financial support to farmers in our 
supply chain. In over 40 countries, our field 
agronomists have provided support, covering 
categories including dairy, coffee, cocoa, 
grains and vegetables. This has helped deliver 
more than 300 individual projects supporting 
the farmers Nestlé works with and their 
rural communities, and supported large-
scale programs like NESPRESSO AAA, the 
NESCAFE Plan and the Nestlé Cocoa Plan. It 
delivered significant successes at local level 
and benefits to many farming communities, 
while contributing to implement practices 
aiming at reducing environmental impact. 

Based on these solid foundations, and guided 
by scientific principles, we are now embarking 
on our next step. Using a broader and deeper 

approach, we are working with farmers 
around the world to support the transition 
to innovative, beneficial and highly effective 
regenerative agricultural practices. We 
recognize both the challenges and benefits to 
farmers, ecosystems, water and human health. 
We are here to help make this happen.

This aspiration is reflected in Nestlé’s net 
zero roadmap, which includes a commitment 
to source 20% of our key ingredients from 
farmers adopting regenerative agriculture 
practices by 2025, and 50% by 2030. 

Throughout this journey, we will continuously 
evolve our approach as the science improves, 
ensuring our actions align with the latest 
knowledge.

" The Food and Land Use Coalition estimates that 
regenerative agriculture is one of the ten transitions 

needed to transform food and land use." 

01
INTRODUCTION

4



The 20th century saw extraordinary 
population and economic growth, enabled 
by a revolution in agriculture. This delivered 
cheap food to many, but also contributed to 
an over-exploitation of natural resources and 
sometimes led to negative social impacts. 

Consumers now increasingly aspire to eat 
and drink in a way that does not harm nature. 
Beyond just food production, agriculture can 
provide various additional services to society 
including environmental, health, social, cultural 
and leisure benefits. But the current approach 
to production mainly optimizes labor, capital 
intensity, economies of scale and margin per 
hectare without always considering the true 
cost to natural and human resources. We 
need an agricultural system that sustains and 
improves the use of resources, rather than 
degrades them. Climate and nature-smart 
agriculture will increasingly form the basis for 
success in the food and beverage sector.

Farming is under pressure on multiple fronts:

a. Gradual degradation of natural 
resources linked to conventional farming 
practices

Soils & soil health

Without healthy soil we would not be able to 
grow our food. In fact, it is estimated that 95% 
of our food is directly or indirectly produced on 
our soils. (1)

Soil is a fundamental asset. Soil health and 
fertility must be protected and restored.  
 
Soil organic matter is an important measure of 
soil fertility. Unfortunately, there is extensive 
evidence showing it is declining, even in the 
world’s most fertile agricultural landscapes. 
Change of land use and continued use of 
conventional farming practices are some of the 
main drivers of the loss of soil organic matter. 

02
SETTING THE SCENE  

Why do we need to move towards regeneration?

5



02 SETTING THE SCENE

Take, for example, the Morrow plots in Illinois, 
USA: long-term research shows a decrease 
of 45% in soil carbon in this region over the 
last 100 years. Some of the most fertile soils 
in Northern France/Belgium are down to less 
than 2% organic matter content. This has 
negatively impacted soil health, which farmers 
compensate for by applying more synthetic 
fertilizers.

According to the FAO in 2017 “… soils have become 
one of the most vulnerable resources in the world. Soils 

are a major carbon reservoir..."

Soil erosion is a growing concern too: current 
soil erosion from agricultural fields is estimated 
to be 10 or 20 times (no tillage) up to more 
than 100 times (conventional tillage) higher 
than the soil formation rate. Some studies 
suggest that in 60 years the arable fertile layer 
may be exhausted.

Since 1961 the use of inorganic nitrogen (N) 
fertilizers has increased 9-fold. To fertilize 
soils sufficiently, there is a need to stabilize or 
reduce global nitrogen and phosphorous (P) 
fertilizer use, while simultaneously improving 
access to fertilizers in regions of soil nutrient 
deficiency. (1)

In addition to the above, soils play a key role 
in global climate processes, through the 
emission of three major GHGs: carbon dioxide 
(CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), and methane 
(CH4). Depending on their condition, soils act 
as carbon sinks or net carbon emitters. Soil 
management practices can play a major role 

in affecting the dynamics of the flow of these 
gases.

Water

Water is an essential resource. Without water, 
plants cannot grow and ensure food security. 
Water is a renewable resource, but two crucial 

challenges must be addressed to manage it 
correctly: the use/replenish balance; and where 
and when water is made available. 

Since 1961, the use of irrigation has 
doubled and now, around 20% of total crop 
land is irrigated. Agriculture accounts for 
approximately 70% of global freshwater 
use increasing to 90% in some developing 
countries. Some 1.2 billion people live in areas 
where severe water shortages and scarcity 
create challenges for agriculture, with very 
high drought frequency for rainfed crops 
and pasture areas or very high-water stress 
experienced in irrigated areas. (2) 

In addition to water scarcity, the other 
main management challenge is the impact 
of agriculture on water quality. Overuse 
of fertilizers, poor manure management 
and unregulated run-off can lead to local 
contamination of aquifers and river streams, 
and eutrophication. Depending on their 
characteristics, such as solubility, half-life and 
mobility, the excessive use of pesticides may 

6



02 SETTING THE SCENE

also contaminate surface water, groundwater 
and soils and may accumulate in ecosystems. 
This may affect biodiversity by killing plants, 
insects, and aquatic organisms and could lead 
to an accumulation of pesticides in the food 
chain. 

Numerous studies show the impact of 
excessive pesticides use; a USGS study 
reported more than 143 different pesticides 
and 21 transformation products in 
groundwater. (3) In a UK survey of 3500 sites, 
100 pesticides were detected.

The agricultural sector, through appropriate 
agronomic practices, has a huge opportunity 
to help transform global water stewardship 
practices in the coming decades, helping meet 
the needs of an increasing population. 

Biodiversity

According to a recent report from IPBES, “Nature and 
its vital contributions to people, which together embody 
biodiversity and ecosystem functions and services, are 

deteriorating worldwide.” (4)

Ecosystem services are critical to humanity 
and affect all aspects of people’s lives, 
including food and medicines. 70% of the 
drugs used to treat cancer are either naturally 
derived or built from synthetic substances 
based on natural equivalents.  In theory, 
over 7000 edible species can be used for 
food, but only 150-200 are commercially 
cultivated. Four plant species provide 50% of 

the world’s energy needs. Food production 
systems have been oversimplified to increase 
their productivity, but now there is a need to 
diversify them in order to increase efficiency 
and resilience. 

“Resilience to extreme weather events is also linked 
to on-farm biodiversity, a typical feature of traditional 

farming systems.” (5) 

Unfortunately, local varieties and breeds 
of domesticated plants and animals are 
disappearing around the globe. It is estimated 
that 25% of animal and plant species are 
threatened (4), and 85 % of wetlands have 
already been lost. IPBES also estimates that 
around 1 million wild animal and plant species 
face extinction, many within decades. (4)

The use of pesticides / herbicides and the use 
of highly productive varieties has contributed 
to tremendous increases in yields, (x 3 since 
1960), providing food to an expanding global 
population. Their overuse has, however, also 
contributed to the deterioration of ecosystems. 
Loss of genetic diversity reduces the natural 
resilience of production systems to attacks by 
pests and plant diseases, threatening global 
food security.

Despite the fact that 75% of major crops are 
dependent on pollinators, wild pollinators have 
declined in abundance and diversity in regions, 
including in North America, according to the 
IPBES report. This is because of factors such 
as land-use change, intensive agricultural 
management, and pesticide use. (6)

While synthetic pesticides help increase crop 
yields, protect farmer incomes and safeguard 
food security, a change of practices and 
innovations are needed to support the reverse 
of biodiversity loss. Through our regenerative 
agriculture work, we are aiming for a 
reduction of synthetic pesticides throughout 
our supply chains. Our approach includes 
requiring that certain pesticides are not used 
in field applications  (Annex 4 of our Nestlé 
Responsible Sourcing Core Requirements). 

7

https://www.nestle.com/sites/default/files/asset-library/documents/library/documents/suppliers/nestle-responsible-sourcing-standard-english.pdf
https://www.nestle.com/sites/default/files/asset-library/documents/library/documents/suppliers/nestle-responsible-sourcing-standard-english.pdf


02 SETTING THE SCENE

We also aim to phase out progressively other 
pesticides and controversial practices (like  
the use of glyphosate as desiccant). In line 
with the need to protect pollinators, we will 
also prioritize actions on insecticides.

b. Climate change and the environmental 
impact of some conventional agricultural 
practices

Land interacts continuously with atmosphere. 
Agriculture is a significant contributor to 
greenhouse gas (GHG) flows: it represented 
around 23% of total net global emissions from 
2007-2016. 13% of CO2, 44% of methane 
and 81% of nitrous oxide emissions originated 
from agriculture, forestry, and other land 
use activities. In addition, new research 
suggests that due to global warming, soils' 
carbon emissions will increase by 9-12% in 
the years to come. This will be triggered by 
higher plant growth, in turn boosting microbial 
decomposition of organic matter and the 
resulting emission of CO2. 

Agriculture is, at-once, a contributor to and 
a victim of global warming. Extreme weather 
events, droughts and changes in local weather 
patterns all severely impact farmers. It is 
therefore important to increase the resilience 
of production models, especially to droughts.

Farming practices - especially appropriate soil 
management, the introduction of cover crops 
and agroforestry - can reduce the net GHG 
emissions, using the power of plants to trap 
carbon from the atmosphere.

There is ongoing scientific debate about 
the exact quantification of this potential (7, 
8, 9). We will strive to help farmers capture 
more carbon in soils and plants, to achieve a 
maximum “carbon sink” effect.

c. Population growth, land use change 
and the importance of yield

Worldwide population is expected to exceed 9 
billion by 2050. This translates into a need to 
produce 50% more food by 2050 (FAO 2018), 
even as the land available for agricultural 
production remains a finite resource. 

Between 1961 and 2000, the global population 
more than doubled. At the same time, per 
capita food production increased by 24%. This 
was mostly enabled by almost tripling crop 
yields. In Europe and in the US, cereal yields 
have more than tripled over the last 60 years. 
This has resulted in a significant reduction in 
arable land use per capita (0.45 to 0.25 ha/
cap). (1)

Looking ahead, maintaining and increasing 
productivity per ha is key to preventing further 
deforestation and land use change as well as 
the associated increase in GHG emissions and 
reduction of natural habitat. In addition, higher 
yields can improve farmer income. Plus, a 
higher yielding crop produced with the same 
inputs generates less GHG per ton. 

The need for sustainable intensification remains more 
pressing than ever, and if professionally managed, this 

can contribute to increased production and carbon 
sequestration while reducing emissions. (5)

8



02 SETTING THE SCENE

Carbon Sequestration 
With the help of grazing animals, carbon is taken from the air by plants and pumped into the soil providing energy  

for soil microbes to build humus and store carbon

9



There is currently no collectively recognized 
and approved precise definition for 
regenerative agriculture. As a concept, it 
intends to bring together the best of a number 
of approaches (conservation agriculture, 

sustainable intensification, climate-smart 
farming, agroecology, low input farming, 
precision farming …), into the ambition to not 
only maintain but actively help improve and 
restore natural resources.

The structure and functioning of managed and unmanaged ecosystems that affect local, regional, and global climate. Land surface characteristics  
such as albedo and emissivity determine the amount of solar and long-wave radiation absorbed by land or reflected or emitted to the atmosphere. 

Surface roughness influences turbulent exchanges of momentum, energy, water, and biogeochemical tracers. 
Land ecosystems modulate the atmospheric composition through emissions and removals of many GHG’s and precursors of SLCFs,  

including biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOCs) and mineral dust. Atmospheric aerosols formed from these precursors affect regional  
climate by altering amounts of precipitation of radiation reaching land surface through their role in cloud physics.

Solar radiation

Emissivity

Long wave radiation

Mineral aerosols
CO2

CO2

CO2 CO2

CO2

Condensation   

evaporation

Sensible heat

CH4 BVOCs
Carbonaceous aerosols

CH4 N2O Fertilizer

N deposition 

& emission

Precipitation

wind

BVOCs
Albedo

03
THE NESTLÉ MODEL FOR 

REGENERATIVE AGRICULTURE
We are guided by agroecological principles and practices

10



03 THE NESTLÉ MODEL

It aims to conserve and restore farmland, its 
ecosystem and its key resources including soil, 
biodiversity, and water, delivering benefits to 
farmers, the environment, and society as a 
whole. These benefits include capture carbon 
in soils and plant biomass; improvements to 
soil health and soil fertility; reduced use of 
agro-chemicals and reduce net emissions of 
GHGs. 

Consequently, it also aims to decrease farmer 
dependence on synthetic inputs, improve the 
resilience of farmland to climate change, and 
benefit farmer livelihoods.  

The absence of a formal definition of 
regenerative agriculture allows for  
pragmatism – adapting practices to local 
environmental conditions and the fostering 
of innovation. Transitioning to regenerative 
farming is a knowledge-intensive journey, 
requiring collaboration with farmers and 
further research. 

a. The holistic model

Nestlé’s comprehensive regenerative 
agriculture model clearly defines the three 
key resources of any agricultural system: soil, 
water, and biodiversity as the focus of the 
collective restoration efforts. Priority actions 
are the use of more diverse production 
systems, the integration of livestock and 
actions across landscapes: all supported by 
science-based agronomical and agroecological 
principles. The integration of livestock provides 
an opportunity to improve nutrient cycles 
and optimize returns on land and biomass, 
while minimizing environmental impacts.
Most importantly, farmers are at the center 
of our model. They are the ones managing 
resources and making decisions on practices 
per to their specific individual circumstances. 
Collaboration with farmers and other relevant 
stakeholders is key to a just transition. Where 
the journey to regenerative agriculture initially 
generates risks or additional costs, farmers 
and other stakeholders need support in the 
journey towards a just transition.

THE HOLISTIC MODEL:

Diverse cropping systems & livestock integration*

Soil health Biodiversity

Collective & landscape actions

Water security & quality

Farmer

* Whenever possible and relevant

11



03 THE NESTLÉ MODEL

b. Soil: a nexus to protect and restore - 
feed the soil, not the plant

Soil is an agronomical nexus where all the 
key natural resources needed to grow plants 
and produce food interconnect. Improving 
soil health brings numerous collateral benefits 
such as better water availability. One critical 
driver of the performance of agroecological 
systems is soil organic matter (SOM). SOM 
is any material produced by living organisms 
(plant or animal) that is returned to the soil 
and goes through the decomposition process. 
It consists of a range of materials: from the 
intact tissues of plants and animals to a 
decomposed mixture of materials known as 
humus. Percentage of SOM closely correlates 
to the content of carbon in soils. As this tends 
to change slowly, it is important to ensure 
representative sampling and long-term 
recording when measuring SOM.

Enhancing SOM can deliver greater nutrients 
to crops from plant decomposition, improving 
fertility and reducing the need for synthetic 
fertilizers. It develops biological activity by 
providing more substrate to the micro flora/
fauna, which will convert it into nutrients (N, 
P, S). SOM improves the physical properties of 
soil, including the structure of soil aggregates 
and porosity. This increases water retention, 
infiltration and drainage capacity. It may 
improve water use efficiency, leading to lower 
irrigation needs. A more porous structure also 

contributes to better soil aeration, and the 
reduction or even elimination of water logging. 
This is vital for all aerobic processes, and soil 
fertility. Root system growth also improves, 
allowing better exploration for water and 
nutrients. In addition, it leads to a reduction in 
run-off and erosion of the arable layer. 

SOM is directly linked to soil organic carbon 
(SOC) content levels (SOM ~ 1.7 x SOC, 
depending on e.g., climate, geology, water). 
Increases in SOM allow for enhanced carbon 
sequestration and the mitigation of GHG 
emissions.  

There is unanimous agreement that the gain in SOM 
and its contribution to GHG mitigation in any given soil 
is largely determined by the quantity of organic matter 

returned to the soil.  (10)

Soil science is complex, and other 
considerations are also important, including 
pH, cation exchange capacity, microbiota 
activity, C/N ratio, %SOM/clay and structure.  
Consequently, soil assessment and mapping 
leveraging existing information and community 
initiatives, should be part of the initial steps for 
implementing regenerative agriculture. This 
helps set a clear baseline, identify any issues, 
and develop expertise.   

potential benefits to soil conservation:

12



03 THE NESTLÉ MODEL

c. The interconnection of practices and 
benefits

Agroecological systems are complex and 
interdependent. Interventions can deliver 
multiple benefits, with various impacts 
on the resources we aim to restore. This 
interconnectivity guides and supports our 
holistic vision for agriculture, the actions that 
we prioritize and the trade-offs that might be 
required depending on the local context. 

 

Practices

     Impact: Soil Water Biodiversity GHG mitigationMinor Moderate Major

Benefits

holistic approach: Each practice can benefit several resources

13



03 THE NESTLÉ MODEL

d. Main regenerative agriculture 
practices

This document does not list all the possible 
interventions that farmers can introduce in 
detail. However, we highlight below some 
major practices that can contribute to restoring 
agroecological systems, which must be 
adapted to the local context.

1. Cover crops

Cover crops are grown in the period between 
two cash crops, when fields would otherwise 
lie fallow. The primary purpose of cover 
cropping is to protect soil. It also helps add 
biomass to the soil, which can increase 
soil organic matter and thus soil carbon 
sequestration. Cover cropping is one of the 
most important regenerative agricultural 
practices. It prevents soil erosion, improves 
soil fertility (as green manure) to suppress 
weeds and to control diseases and pests. 
Cover crops can consist of mixtures of different 
plant species, including legumes to fix nitrogen 
in the soil. A very wide range of plant species 
including cereals planted off-season (rye, oats, 
barley, wheat), ryegrass, legumes such as 
clover, alfalfa, peas, beans, lupin and vetch, as 
well as buckwheat, sun hemp, radish, brassica, 
turnips, and rapeseed may be used as cover 
crops. Before sowing the new cash crop, 
cover crops are either ploughed under, cut or 
ground. Some cover crops can also be used for 
fodder and grazing.

Choosing the appropriate cover crop requires 
local knowledge and, above all, a clear idea 

of the purpose of each variety selected: 
whether its pivot roots that fragment the soil 
deeper, dense root systems that enhance 
microbiological activity, the creation of above 
the ground biomass, pollinators attraction, 
fixing nitrogen, the creation of a dense cover to 
protect from heavy rains etc.

2. Diversified crop rotation 

Crop rotation is the practice of planting 
different crops sequentially in the same plot 
over a number of years, avoiding planting 
the same crop in the same field year after 
year. A simple rotation might involve two or 
three crops, and complex rotations might 
incorporate a dozen or more. Usually, rotations 
aim to include complementary crops, such 
as legumes to add nitrogen to the soil before 
or after a crop that extracts high quantities of 
nitrogen. Ideally, rotations include legumes, 
deep-rooted crops, and high-residue crops. 
Diversified crop rotations may have important 
benefits. Farmers experience improved yields, 
better nitrogen management, better resistance 
to disease, as well as healthier soils and 
less soil erosion. Crop rotations reduce the 
pressure from specific weeds and diseases 
more successfully than monocropping or 
narrow rotations because different plant 
species have different levels of susceptibility 
to pests and diseases. This disease sensitivity 
is an important parameter to consider when 
selecting cover crop species as it allows the 
breaking of disease and pest infestation cycles. 
Whenever possible, integrating livestock 
farming in crop production systems enables 
wider crop rotations through integration of 
fodder crops and grazing mixtures.

14



03 THE NESTLÉ MODEL

3. Mulching & crop residues cover

Mulch is any type of plant residue or organic 
material that is spread or kept on the surface 
of the soil as covering, for example straw or 
cut cover crops. There are several benefits 
to this practice: prevention of weed growth, 
conservation of soil moisture, prevention of 
soil erosion, and stabilizing soil temperatures. 
This practice is also especially important 
for increasing soil organic matter and 
consequently carbon sequestration. 

4. Minimum or conservation tillage

Minimum tillage is a farming system in which 
soil tillage is reduced to its absolute minimum, 
in order to minimize soil disturbances. In one 
of its most advanced forms, a cash crop is 
sown directly, under the cover crop in place 
and the seeds are directly deposited into a 
soil that has not been ploughed or intensively 
tilled. This requires specific machinery but 
avoids/minimizes the use of herbicides. 
Conservation tillage practices include: ridge 
tillage, whereby crop rows are planted on top 
of ridges that are scraped off for planting and 
rebuilt during the growing season; strip tillage, 

whereby only the seed row zone is prepared; 
mulch tillage, a form of reduced tillage in 
which plant residue is retained and spread out 
but the soil is tilled just prior to planting; and 
tillage along contours of a slope to prevent soil 
erosion.

5. Organic fertilizers

This can include any organic matter that is 
used as fertilizer: animal manure but also 
compost and green manure (residues of 
cover crops). Manure and organic fertilizers 
contribute to soil fertility by adding organic 
matter and plant nutrients, and feeding the soil 
fauna, which is essential for good soil health.

6. Irrigation technology

There are different irrigation technologies, 
which differ in the terms of water use 
efficiency. Surface or flood irrigation uses 
gravity to distribute the water, which then 
seeps into the soil of the field. This method 
tends to use too much water and to saturate 

Nestlé Pakistan: implementation of new generation soil moisture 
sensors

15



03 THE NESTLÉ MODEL

the land. Sprinkler irrigation mimics natural 
rainfall. Water is distributed through a system 
of pipes and is then sprayed into the air 
through sprinklers that break up the water 
into small droplets. Drip irrigation distributes 
water through tubes and emitters. It allows 
water to drip slowly to the roots of plants 
through narrow tubes equipped with emitters. 
Subsurface irrigation does the same but below 
the surface of the ground. This system is best 
adapted to areas that are arid, hot, windy, or 
have sandy soil types, because it minimizes 
water evaporation. The latter two methods in 
particular contribute to water savings.

Another important driver is the management of 
the irrigation itself, including when to irrigate, 
which quantity to use and at what frequency. 
These considerations can be better informed 
using soil moisture sensors, and plant 
stress level sensors. Paired with digital data 
processing, this helps maximize the impact 
of water provided to the soil and crops. Such 
technologies are developing rapidly and will 
make a significant contribution in the future. 

7. Riparian buffers

These are strips of land along waterways or 
water bodies. They should feature permanent 
vegetation cover (grass, bushes, hedges, trees) 
and occupy a sufficient width (at least 5-20m) 
to protect water resources from pollution by 
agrochemicals, fertilizers and soil sediment. 
Riparian buffers protect the land adjacent 
to waterways from soil erosion, and provide 
habitats for fauna, including pollinators and 
other beneficial insects.

8. Integrated nutrient management

This means fertilization based on a plan that 
considers the type of fertilizer; the method of 
application; the fractioning; and the quantity, 
calculated according to the needs of the crops. 
The calculation accounts for nutrients provided 
by organic manure and by the previous crop. 
It should be based on recent soil analysis and 
site characteristics. Incorrect application of 
fertilizers can damage soil biodiversity and soil 
health, lead to pollution of water resources 
and GHG emission increases. Nutrient 
use efficiency should be measured and 
benchmarked (see section on KPIs).

9. Intercropping

Intercropping means growing several crops 
simultaneously in the same field. This can be 
done by mixing the seeds of different crops. 
It can also be achieved by growing them 
apart in different rows, thus protecting the 
soil in-between the rows, enhancing the root 
systems and sequestering carbon in the soil. 
Intercropping can contribute to the production 

Nestlé Thailand: soil analysis field training to optimize fertilization by 
Nestlé agronomist

16



03 THE NESTLÉ MODEL

of higher total yields when crop species are 
selected to complement each other and 
not compete for the same resources. This 
has benefits for soil health, soil protection 
and shading, micro-climate, irrigation and 
biodiversity, and generates additional income 
for the farmer. Biocontrol of pests is more 
efficient through maintaining a broader variety 
of beneficial insects.

10. Agroforestry & silvo-pastoral systems

These are systems in which trees, hedgerows 
and agricultural/horticultural crops and/or 
livestock are produced on the same piece 
of land. These systems provide co-benefits, 
including additional sources of farm income, 
carbon sequestration in trees and soil organic 
matter, protection against wind erosion, 
improved water management and provision 
of habitats for beneficial insects, pollinators, 
birds, and other species. Local knowledge of 
the ecology and land requirements must be 
considered in the selection of trees and crops 
for optimal results. Shade trees in coffee and 
cocoa, or alleys of trees planted in a field 
within another cropping system, are common 
and beneficial examples.

11. Hedgerows, green buffers

Hedges or hedgerows are lines of closely-
spaced shrubs or regularly-pruned trees, 
planted and maintained to form a barrier. 
They are often located at field boundaries but, 
depending on local climate and soil conditions, 
it can be beneficial to plant hedgerows within 
the field to maximize impact. Hedges can 
serve as windbreaks to protect crops and 
soil. They offer interesting habitats for natural 

predators and can also provide organic 
material for mulching. They can deliver similar 
benefits as those provided by agroforestry 
systems.

12. Integrated pest management (IPM) and 
biocontrol 

IPM focuses on managing pests and diseases 
through a combination of methods. It is based 
on field monitoring, rather than the sole 
use of synthetic pesticides to destroy pest 
populations. This includes pest identification, 
monitoring pest populations and damage 
levels. Based on this, IPM applies economic 
thresholds to decide when to implement pest 
control actions. Pest and disease issues are 
minimized through a combination of biological, 
cultural and mechanical methods and chemical 
pest control. The approach also includes the 
use of organic pesticides. Biocontrol of pests 
and plant diseases uses other organisms, such 
as beneficial insects, natural predators, and 
specific plant species to control the targeted 
pests. Measuring the level of implementation 
of IPM and, in particular, measuring the 
outcomes can be complex. IPM requires 
training agricultural advisors and farmers and 
the adaptation of the approach to the crop 
and region. It is often advisable to  devolve 
implementation to local experts and research 
organizations.

17



03 THE NESTLÉ MODEL

13. Precision farming

The basic underlying principle of precision 
agriculture is to adjust, as precisely as 
possible, the application of agrochemicals to 
the variability of a field or a crop. Typically, it 
includes variable rate application of fertilizers 
or pesticides depending on soil type or 
differences observed in the field (e.g., crop 
nutrient status, pest pressure). It is generally 
based on the use of GPS technologies that 
provide  exact positions within a field, as well 
as mapping soil/crop conditions.

Precision farming technologies can include 
parallel driving systems in tractors; section 
control; variable rate application of fertilizers; 
pesticides in machines; or the use of digital 
farm decision support tools and optical 
sensors. It also includes receiving precise 
data to make better decisions such as when 
to irrigate, using soil moisture sensors. In 
dairy, data collection encompasses animal 
health and welfare parameters, breeding, feed 
characteristics like dry matter and nutrient 
content and using handheld NIRS (near 
infrared spectroscopy) devices. 

14. Manure storage & application on the field

Different manure storage and application 
systems have different impacts on the 
environment. They are key ways of controlling 
CH4 and N2O emissions on a dairy farm. 
As a general rule: the farm must have 
sufficient manure storage capacity to ensure 
that manure application takes place at the 
appropriate time, depending on the vegetative 
cycle of crops and their needs, (i.e., when 
crops are present to absorb nutrients provided 
by the manure) and not just to free-up manure 
storage capacity.

•	 The manure storage system should never 
leak; any run-off must be captured.

•	 The collection system should ensure quick 
and complete collection, avoiding run-off 
and methane emissions.

Best practices include covered storage, 
separation liquid/solid (to reduce methane 
production) and production of biogas from 
manure. Regarding on-field application as 
fertilizer, its contribution to crop nutrition must 
be integrated into fertilization calculations. 
Application practices should aim to eliminate 
losses, leakage into water resources and the 
formation of nitrous oxide.

15. Herd management

This aims at optimizing the productivity of 
herds of farm animals. It includes monitoring 
and management of animal health and age, 
adapted animal welfare practices, feeding 
based on calculated requirements and fertility 
management. Using herd management 
software facilitates and optimizes decision-
making through more precise and real time 
data collection (see above precision farming).

18



03 THE NESTLÉ MODEL

16. Integrated pasture management & 
grazing strategies

Grass is highly beneficial to soil fertility and 
soil carbon sequestration. Pasture should 
be integrated in dairy farming systems as 
much as possible. This should be combined 
with a good rotational grazing strategy to 
optimize the use of the on-farm grass/base 
ration production. This can include grazing 
methods such as adaptive multi-paddock, 
rotational grazing, mob grazing and integrated 
crop-livestock systems. Mob grazing uses 
large herds to graze the lands, sometimes at 
higher grazing intervals. Pastures should be 
maintained as multispecies areas, including 
grasses and legumes.

17. Landscape-scale collaboration

The regenerative agriculture approach may 
look beyond individual farm level. Such 
landscape-scale actions can include the 
protection or rehabilitation of natural resources 
contributing to higher resilience of farming 
systems and delivering several other benefits 
(health, GHG emissions, welfare, profitability 
…) to local communities. Examples include: the 
reforestation of watershed areas and hilltops; 
protection of waterbodies and groundwater 
resources or rehabilitation; and regulated 
usage of communal land. Green corridors, 
diversity of production systems or agroforestry 
projects aimed at fostering biodiversity are 
much more impactful when considered at a 
regional level. Farmers should be encouraged 
and rewarded for participating in community 
actions at landscape level.

19



04 THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY

a. Guiding principles

None of the 17 interventions described in the 
previous chapter should be considered as a 
universal must-do solution regardless of local 
conditions. In agriculture, one size does not 
fill all. However, a couple of generic principles 
do guide implementation strategies, to ensure 
projects are: 

i.	 Pragmatic and adjusted to local 
conditions: 
Agronomy is a location-based science, 
so solutions must be adapted to local 
situations and constraints. We aim not to 
exclude any locally relevant approaches, 
and value innovation and creativity.

ii.	 Results-focused, driven by measurable 
outcomes: Focusing on how we measure 
impact will help deliver more tangible 
outcomes, rather than simply pushing a 
standard set of practices regardless of 
local results.

iii.	 Beneficial to the farmers:  
The transition and risk-taking phase 
towards more regenerative outcomes 
must be dealt with carefully. Support may 
be needed if the transition initially creates 
risks or additional costs.

iv.	 Collaborative and science-based: 
Localization of practices and 
implementation in collaboration with 
farmers and farmers’ associations, local 
authorities, NGOs and national agriculture 
research institutes are key success 
factors.

v.	 Carried out at landscape level wherever 
relevant:  
Individual farms are the building blocks 
of a regenerative food system. But 
interventions at landscape level are 
needed to help deliver additional impact 
and restore natural resources. This must 
be implemented by taking into account 
complex interactions across landscapes– 
from those taking place globally to more 
localized interactions affecting the use 

04
the implementation strategy

We adapt to local conditions and needs

20



04 THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY

of resources. Landscape approaches 
require collaborative action between 
farmers, communities, organizations 
and industry (see details in chapter 3, 
point 17). Water is a topic that must be 
considered holistically. Water is a shared 
resource used by different stakeholders; 
wherever water scarcity is a threat, it must 
be considered at watershed level. (specific 
details are described in annex)

vi.	 Tailored to smallholder needs: 
Smallholders play a major role in global 
food supply systems (small farms <2 ha 
represent 84% of the total number of 
farms, operate only around 12% of all 
agricultural land and produce roughly 35% 
of the world’s food” (11)). Their specific 
circumstances must be assessed with 
care.  Regenerative agriculture practices 
can have a greater positive impact on 
the resilience, economic stability and 
profitability of smallholder farms when 
compared to larger landholders. However, 
smallholder farms are also often operating 
at a higher risk level than larger-scale, 
commercial operations and, consequently, 
require tailored solutions for incentivizing 
and implementing regenerative agriculture 
practices. Approaches targeted to 
smallholders should have a stronger focus 
on low-cost implementation strategies, 
use of local inputs, integration of 
traditional knowledge, and establishment 
of innovative extension models.  

Therefore, integration of a tailored 
smallholder approach into a project 
requires:  

•	 The development of a distinct set of 
KPIs for measuring outcomes that are 
specific to smallholder systems, 

•	 The creation of educational/training 
programs to increase the technical 
capabilities of smallholders in both 
basic and alternative agronomic 
practices, 

•	 The development of support 
mechanisms to give them access to 
more efficient technologies, including 
innovative technical solutions,

•	 The implementation of community 
actions to impact wider society. 

vii.	 In intensive farming systems, the general 
aim is to reduce the use of synthetic farm 
inputs, for smallholders the intensification 
of production through the smart use 
of inputs to increase local food supply 
and farmer income is often the first 
necessary step of any intervention. With 
productivity and income increase, reduced 
yield variability, stronger resilience is a 
major outcome of the introduction of 
regenerative practices with smallholders 
who are often more vulnerable to shocks, 
climate events and price fluctuations.

21



04 THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY

b. The roadmap

In our direct sourcing districts we develop 
reference farms in collaboration with local 
partners (including academic, research, 
institutional partners). The main purpose of 
these farms is to:

•	 Validate, at local level, the expected 
impact and benefits of the practices 
introduced, 

•	 Learn what the key drivers and barriers 
are for scaling-up,

•	 Demonstrate feasibility for implementation 
on other farms.

In parallel, understanding the baseline from 
which farmers can start applying regenerative 
practices is crucial to driving the relevant 
interventions and measuring progress. 

Regenerative agriculture is a comprehensive 
approach to farming which considers all 
resources required and impacted. Depending 
on the local context and constraints,  resources 
may have a different priority level, potentially 
requiring trade-offs. Therefore, a solid initial 
mapping of the local situation (a minima 
farming practices, and depending on needs: 
soil conditions, hydrogeological studies, pest 
and disease prevalence) is an effective way 
to make sure that the right challenges will be 
addressed in the right sequence, and the right 
opportunities identified. 

From this baseline we have developed an 
implementation framework with 3 main pillars, 
summarized in the below chart. 
More details are provided in the internal 
guideline “Nestlé regen ag implementation 
guide”.

Technical 

 
Initial mapping resources & practices

 
Engage farmers, reference farms

 
Deploy, measure & report

 
Adoption of practices  

at farm level

 Collaborative

 
Expertise, partnerships, incl. R&D

 
Communication strategy

 
Wokshops & advocacy

 
Awareness creation, 

engagement and training  
of stakeholders

  Financial

 
Funding models, internal & external

 
Benchmarking

 
Ensure long term demand

 
Ensuring competitive 
solutions and creating  

demand

22



04 THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY

c. Tools and metrics

To improve we need to be able to measure 
change. Another common challenge in 
regenerative agriculture is the lack of common 
metrics and indicators for assessing changes 
over time. 

A lack of quantitative evidence of the benefits of these 
approaches will convince neither farmers, consumers, 

nor policy makers to adopt and promote them (12).

Measuring starts at the individual farm level 
with a baseline regenerative agriculture 
farm assessment, repeated in the years 
that follow, as practices evolve and results 
become more visible. We aim to measure 
outcomes as much as possible. Indeed, 
as approaches and indicators need to be 
tailored to local situations, it is important 

to assess whether practices actually deliver 
the expected outcome. This avoids taking a 
dogmatic approach, frees up the creativity of 
local farmers and scientists, fosters changes in 
practices and speeds up the implementation 
process. 

Changes in soil health and the natural 
environment usually take several years. In 
the short term, we need indicators based on 
practices with immediate outcomes. We also 
acknowledge that, in a number of areas, result 
indicators must either be created or improved 
by the scientific community in order to be 
usable at scale. Therefore, we encourage 
the application of a combination of practices 
and impact-based indicators to monitor 
the progress of farms on the regenerative 
journey (see full dashboards in annexes). As 
measurement technologies evolve rapidly, we 
will keep a close eye on the latest scientific 
developments to stay at the forefront of 
innovation in this critical area.

Practices Outcomes Positive impacts on Positive results for farmers

IMPACTS OF REGENERATIVE AGRICULTURE: 
Practices, expected outcomes, impacts and results

23



04 THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY

i. Farm assessment tool

To understand the implementation level of 
different regenerative practices and collect 
the above-mentioned data, we have created a 
crop specific farm assessment tool. The initial 
assessment sets a baseline, i.e., the extent to 
which current practices are already in line with 
regenerative agriculture. It helps to identify 
improvement opportunities and to create a 
roadmap. The follow-up assessments will then 
show developments versus the initial baseline 
and farm roadmap. Aggregated results of farm 
assessments per crop and/or region are the 
basis of Nestlé’s internal and external reporting 
versus objectives and commitments. 

These assessments also allow us to collect the 
primary data needed to estimate the farms’ 
GHG footprint. We can also collect several 
other impact metrics that will reflect the actual 
farm situation, regarding water, biodiversity 
etc. As many regenerative agriculture practices 
have a significant impact on GHG emissions 
and removals, regular reassessment of 
practices will allow us to monitor the evolution 
of the GHG footprint.

ii. Grading system 

The transition towards regenerative practices 
is not a one-off project. It is a knowledge-
intensive journey on which farmers embark, 
and then continuously seek improvement. 
Therefore, we created a 3-level scale to reflect 
this progression and acknowledge the need for 
a dynamic process rather than a box-ticking 
static approach. The thresholds are based on 
our specially designed farm assessment tool. 
(details of requirements and KPIs are provided 
in annex 2)

1.	 Engaged - Farmer has embarked on the 
Regenerative Agriculture journey

2.	 Advanced - Farmer is well established 
in Regenerative Agriculture, several 
practices well implemented

3.	 Leading - Farmer is seen as an expert 
in his/her region, impacts of practices 
are demonstrated through farm level 
indicators

iii. Indicators & Dashboard

The following minimum indicators are 
measured through the Nestlé Regenerative 
Agriculture Farm Assessment Tools. (see 
tables below). These indicators measure the 
implementation level of key regenerative 
practices, short term outcomes and some 
of the longer-term desired results. An initial 
assessment sets the baseline, helps identify 
priority areas for improvement, and based on 
this, future assessments capture the changes.

Practice-based KPIs 

TOPIC KPI

Soil cover

Number of months when soils are 
covered through crops, cover crops, 
plant residues or mulch (on an annual 
basis)

Cover crops % of crop land planted with cover crops

Crop rotation
nbr of different crops grown over 
3 years on the same piece of land 
(including cover crops)

Minimum tillage % of crop land managed with minimum 
tillage

Farming practices
% of farmland under specific practices 
(practices to be defined per cropping 
system & region)

Result-based KPIs 

TOPIC KPI

Soil organic 
matter Soil organic matter

Fertilizer 
productivity

Fertilizer productivity (crop yield per kg 
N applied); 
Crop yield per per kg N from artificial 
fertilizer

Habitats
% of habitat areas on the agricultural 
land (hedges, tree alleys, flower strips, 
green belts, riparian buffers)

Riparian buffers % of watercourses with riparian buffers

Pesticides # of applications of synthetic pesticides 
on the Nestlé crop

24



04 THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY

The farm assessment also monitors crop 
yields, which allows rapid reaction and 
correction of practices if this key indicator 
does not go in the right direction during the 
implementation of regenerative agriculture 
implementation. For dairy and perennial crops, 
additional specific KPIs are considered (see the 
reference document on KPIs).

The farm assessment tool carried out by a 
Nestlé or third-party agronomist is not the only 
way to monitor these indicators. There are 
technologies that can be used in addition, to 
ease the data collection or to provide further 
evidence when required for verification, carbon 
reduction or other metrics. For example, 
different organizations have started using 
remote sensing through satellites to provide 
evidence of farming practices such as the 
use of cover crops, zero tillage, crop rotation 
or riparian buffers. Other technologies are 
being developed to ease the measurement 
of soil organic matter and various soil health 
parameters, for example, automated soil 
sampling, digital sensors, or combinations 
of remote sensing with on the ground 
assessments. Nestlé investigates and pilots 
such solutions where they are available and 
make sense. Local teams are encouraged to 
follow local developments.   

Monitoring a large number of farm level 
indicators can be time and resource intensive. 
Therefore, in a typical regenerative agriculture 
implementation project, we develop reference 
farms to pilot new practices and demonstrate 
impacts (see chapter 4.b). In these reference 
farms, we recommend monitoring additional 

KPIs, that are more detailed and specific, to 
verify whether the desired impact is being 
achieved. In particular, the carbon footprint 
must be estimated, using the Cool Farm Tool 
or other tools indicated by Nestlé. 

Going beyond 

Beyond the above, additional KPIs are optional 
and depend on the specific objectives of 
the local project. They may cover soil, water 
quantity and quality, and biodiversity. For 
soil health, they can include pH, nutrient 
levels, C/N ratio, % SOM/clay, water storage 
and infiltration capacity. These are especially 
relevant in reference farms. Regarding 
biodiversity, the Nestlé Farm Assessment 
Tools measures impacts on biodiversity in an 
indirect way, including the number of different 
crops in the fields or the percentage of habitat 
areas on farm. While these are valid indicators, 
a more direct impact on biodiversity, such 
as soil microbial biomass and the variety or 
number of earthworms, or quantity and variety 
of pollinators can also be measured. This can 
be pioneered on reference farms to provide a 
proof of concept. 

The Annex 3 “going one step beyond” 
summarizes recommendations for additional 
tools and measurements provided by the 
organization “The Nature Conservancy” via 
its collaboration with Nestlé on the design of 
our regenerative agriculture model. Depending 
on local needs and priorities, we encourage 
market teams to identify focus areas for their 
initiatives and to pilot tools accordingly.

25



05 WHAT WILL SUCCESS LOOK LIKE?

1.	 Soil organic matter increases every  
year, and agriculture acts as a net  
carbon sink

2.	 Water resources are not used beyond 
their replenishment rate at watershed 
level

3.	 Biodiversity increases continuously on 
farmland

4.	 Farmers decrease synthetic fertilizer use 
every year; and a majority of them use 
organic fertilizers

5.	 Farmers use less pesticides every year; 
and a majority use biological control 
methods instead 

6.	 Farming is an economically attractive 
activity, and the average age of farmers 
decreases

7.	 Yields and return on farm investments 
continue to improve

8.	 Landscapes in key sourcing areas switch 
from monocropping approaches to more 
varied landscapes, including greater tree 
cover and more hedgerows

9.	 Crops are traceable to the farm or group 
of farms of origin

10.	 Consumers better understand and 
appreciate the contribution of farmer 
to society, and recognize Nestlé’s 
contribution 

Regenerative agriculture is a knowledge-intensive journey. Projects, initiatives, technologies, actions 
and metrics will evolve as science develops and new insights and innovation spread across the sector. 
Our vision is of a more sustainable agricultural approach that contributes to a regenerative food 
system. We aspire to help develop agricultural production systems where:

05
WHAT WILL SUCCESS LOOK LIKE? 

26



1.	 FAO - Status of the World’s Soil Resources 2015 – Technical 
summary 

2.	 FAO 2020, Overviewing water challenges in agriculture
3.	 FAO – IWMI 2018, More people more food worse water?
4.	 IPBES (2020) – the global assessment report on 

biodiversity and ecosystem services
5.	 IPCC (2020) - Climate change and land
6.	 Klein et al, Importance of Pollinators in Changing 

Landscapes for World Crops
7.	 McGuire (2018) Washington state univ, CSANR 

Regenerative agriculture: solid principles, extraordinary 
claims 

8.	 World Resource Institute Regenerative agriculture: good for 
soil health, but limited potential to mitigate climate change, 
Richard Waite, Tim Searchinger and Jessica Zionts

9.	 World Resource Institute – Further explanation on the 
potential contribution of soil carbon sequestration on 
working agricultural lands to climate change mitigation, 
(2020), Tim Searchinger & Janet Ranganathan

10.	 Giller et al. (2015) Beyond conservation agriculture
11.	 SK Lowder, MV Sanchez, & R Bertini, (2021) Which 

farms feed the world and has farmland become more 
concentrated?

12.	 IUCN approaches to sustainable agriculture - Exploring the 
pathways towards the future of farming 
 
 
 
 
 

•	 Giller et al. (2021) regenerative agriculture: an  
agronomic perspective

•	 Newton et al.  (2020) What is Regenerative Agriculture? 
A review of scholar and practitioners' definitions based on 
processes and outcomes

•	 L. Schreefel et al. (2020) Regenerative agriculture – the soil 
is the base

•	 Gollany et al (2011) Agronomy journal 103, 234-246
•	 Leminih et al (2006) Agriculture, ecosystems & 

Environment 109, 9-19
•	 Johnston et al (2009) Advances in Agronomy 101, 1-57
•	 IPBES (2018) the assessment report on land degradation 

and restoration
•	 IUCN 2020 Common ground Restoring land health for 

sustainable agriculture
•	 J Larkin et al. (2019) Semi natural habitats and ecological 

focus areas on cereals, beef and dairy farms in Ireland
•	 Project drawdown (2020) Farming our way out of the 

climate crisis
•	 ADEME (2011) realization d’un bilan des emissions de gaz 

a effet de serre

•	 Science Based Target - Foundations for science-based net-
zero target setting in the corporate sector

•	 X: Dupla et al. (2021) Changes in top soil organic carbon 
content in the swiss leman region cropland from 1993 to 
present. Insights from large scale on-farm study

•	 Todd A. Ontl (2012) Soil carbon storage
•	 R. Cho (2018) Columbia climate school Can 
•	 Bossio et al. (the role of soil carbon in natural climate 

solutions
•	 P. Baveye (2017) The “4 per 1000” initiative: a credibility 

issue for the soil science community?
•	 JQ Yang Nature communication (2021) 4D imaging reveals 

mechanisms of clay-carbon protection and release
•	 INRAE (2020) effet du changement climatique sur le 

stockage de carbone dans les sols de grandes cultures
•	 INRAE (2020) stocker du carbone dans les sols francais – 

quel potentiel et a quel cout ?
•	 Cranfield Environment and Agrifood (2019) Regenerative 

agriculture – Identifying the impact; enabling the potential. 
Report for SYSTEMIC

•	 FAO (2017) Carbone organique du sol: une richesse 
invisible

•	 Rodale Institute (2020) regenerative agriculture and the soil 
carbon solution

•	 Rainforest Alliance (2020) Raising the bar – regenerative 
agriculture for more resilient agro-ecosystems

•	 FOEI, TNI, CROCEVIA (2020) Junk agroecology: the 
corporate capture of agroecology for a partial ecological 
transition without social justice

•	 Rainforest Alliance (2020) regenerative agriculture for more 
resilient agro-ecosystems

•	 Rodale institute (2020) regenerative agriculture and the soil 
carbon solution

•	 Nestlé, Creating shared value (2015) Soil & soil health
•	 Nestlé, Creating shared value (2015) Natural Capital 

Biodiversity
•	 The markets institute at WWF, business case (2020) – An 

environmental and economic path towards net zero dairy 
farm emission

•	 Patagonia (2020) Barriers for farmers and ranchers to adopt 
regenerative ag practices in the US – a roadmap for funders 
and stakeholders

•	 California State University, The Carbon Underground 
(2017) What is regenerative agriculture?

•	 Sean Clark, (2020) Organic farming and climate change: 
the need for innovation

•	 L.G. Smith, G. Kirk … Nature Communications (2019) The 
greenhouse gas impacts of converting food production in 
England and Wales to organic methods

•	 EitFood, (2020), Farming for a better climate: 5 examples of 
regenerative agriculture done well 

•	 EUGreenDeal - List of potential agricultural practices that 
eco-schemes could support

list of references

bibliography

27



annex 1

A watershed (or river basin) is the area of land 
from which all surface run-off flows through a 
sequence of streams, rivers, aquifers and lakes 
into the sea or another outlet at a single river 
mouth, estuary, or delta. Surface water is the 
most visible, but groundwater is also important 
in most watersheds. 

A watershed covers many different entities 
– farms, farmers, landowners, industry, 
habitation, people, conservation areas and 
regulators. Also important are ecological 
and biodiverse features that are not always 
formally protected or managed correctly. 
Actions by one organization impacts the 
others. Therefore, sustainable management 
of water resources requires interaction and 
cooperation, at watershed level, best achieved 
through ongoing stakeholder engagement.

In principle, water is a renewable resource 
(except when taken from aquifers that are 
not replenished, known as ‘fossil aquifers’). 
Water is ‘lost’ if either more water is extracted 
than is naturally replenished every year, or if 
it is made unusable due to pollution. Good 
water stewardship is about ensuring water 
‘borrowed’ from the watershed is returned to 
the natural environment for further safe use.

 

An important aspect of water stewardship at 
watershed level is to ensure water needs are 
shared equitably and sustainably between 
all users and the natural environment. The 
overall water balance of a watershed is defined 
by hydrogeologists who estimate each flow. 
Sustainable water management plans are 
then defined accordingly. This analysis means 
we can assess the relative importance of 
a every water usage, including agriculture, 
compared to the other natural and man-made 
flows in the region, helping identify risks and 
opportunities.

Larger commercial farms are more likely to 
have options available to overcome water 
scarcity by extracting water from wells or river 
streams. Smaller farms without these options 
(especially at family and subsistence scale) and 
the natural environment are more vulnerable 
to extremes of scarcity. Larger farms therefore 
should ensure they do not exacerbate these 
impacts. For example, pumping more water 
during a crisis may further decrease water 
availability for other users.

An advanced approach to water management 
at watershed level includes support for 
actions, via stakeholder engagement, to 
assist the more vulnerable, either directly via 
water provision projects, or indirectly through 
environmental improvement projects. Good 
water stewardship will protect and promote 
biodiversity, which in turn has a beneficial 
impact on farming, for example by promoting 
natural forms of pest control and pollinating 
insects.   

Water management on and beyond the 
farm

Most water management activities take place 
on the farm. However, a watershed approach 
involves being aware of the potential impacts 
beyond the farm in terms of water volumes, 
water levels and water quality.

THE SPECIFIC CASE OF WATER
Where it matters, a watershed approach

28



annex 1

a. Water quantity: withdrawals ensuring 
replenishment

The largest use of water in agriculture is by 
far for crop irrigation. Crops may be rain-fed 
(via ‘green’ water), irrigated with ‘blue’ water 
or managed through a combination of both. 
Irrigation can impact water resources, when it 
uses water pumped or diverted from surface or 
groundwater. These impacts  include:

•	 Over-pumping sources with lower 
water levels nearby (surface water and 
groundwater),

•	 Collective negative impacts of over-
pumped sources over a wide area,

•	 Lower water levels increasing the energy 
needed and costs of pumping (at farm 
level and for other users), and at worst 
may dry up streams, wetlands, and wells.

Water efficiency is highly dependent on the 
irrigation method chosen. Generally, flood 
irrigation and over-application of water to land 
should be avoided, with drip irrigation often 
considered the best option. However, there 
may sometimes be beneficial impacts from 
irrigation losses, such as recharging aquifers 
or excess water reaching nearby small farms. 
An understanding of the wider hydrological 
impacts of a chosen method in the local and 
social context is important.

In dry environments, dependent on irrigation, 
more thirsty crops will result in greater impacts 
on water resources.

b. Water quality: protect from 
contaminations

Pollution from a farm can cause downstream 
issues in the watershed. The number, size and 
concentration of farms in a watershed can 
exacerbate these risks. This is especially true 
for diffuse pollution such as eutrophication 
and the contamination of groundwater with 
pesticides and nitrates. 

Drivers and causes of water contamination are 
numerous, including:

•	 Over-irrigation in hot, dry climates can 
lead to soil salinization due to high 
evaporation rates.

•	 Pesticides and fertilizers may pollute 
ground and surface water via run-off and 
infiltration. 

•	 Pollution of water courses by fertilizers 
causes ‘eutrophication’, especially 
excessive N and P that lead to growth of 
algae (often creating algal blooms) which 
in turn use up the oxygen needed by other 
organisms. In some cases, high algae 
concentration becomes toxic to wildlife, 
preventing further use as drinking or even 
recreational water.

•	 Regarding livestock, the main risks come 
from animal waste, especially where they 
gather or are kept together in enclosures 
or buildings. The drinking point where 
animals gather or a high concentration of 
livestock in other areas concentrates run-
off and can enter watercourses directly or 
via drains, including where animal slurry is 
used as fertilizer.  
 
The main risks include organic waste 
washed into watercourses, which uses 
up the oxygen needed by wildlife, and 
fecal contamination of drinking water 
sources. Groundwater may also be 
polluted. Another emerging concern 
is the contamination from veterinary 
pharmaceuticals excreted in livestock 
waste.

•	 Water used for general farm management 
must be collected appropriately to avoid 
aquifer and river contamination. The main 
risks come from cleaning chemicals and 
animal waste.

•	 Poorly managed sanitary/domestic 
wastewater is a pollution risk. Latrines 
and septic tanks may contaminate 
groundwater and nearby surface water 
(for example, with nitrates) and present 
a micro-biological health risk to drinking 
water sources, including nearby water 
wells. 

•	 Poorly managed run-off from rain events 
can cause soil erosion and rapidly carry 
pollutants into sensitive watercourses. 
Buffer strips and field margins are 
important management techniques.

29



annex 1

c. Key areas for action

Strategic area Actions Benefits Example of specific projects

Optimise   
water 
efficiency  
"more crop 
per drop"

Drive the adoption of 
agricultural practices optimising 
water productivity

Reduced run-off, reduced 
evapotranspiration, better use of rainfall 
by the plant, less water used per ton of 
raw material produced

Introduce mulching, cover crops, plant 
nutrition, conservation tillage, terracing, soil 
organic matter conservation, intercropping …

Introduce crops/ varieties better 
adapted to local hydric condition Less water requirements

Switch sourcing to less water demanding 
crops 
Introduce varieties more resistant to drought

Reduce wastes & losses of raw 
materials

Less water consumed per ton of raw 
material produced and used Reduce post-harvest losses

Collect & store rain water
Better use of rainfalls, more rainwater 
made available for irrigation and on 
farm use

Build on farm water storage, create local 
reservoirs

Drive adequate plant nutrition

Higher photosynthesis efficiency, 
reduced evapotranspiration, less water 
used per ton of raw material produced, 
less leaching of chemical fertilisers

Enrich K+ fertilisation 
Reduce NPK chemical fertilisation

Reduce water 
withdrawal 
"use less"

Introduce more efficient 
irrigation technologies Less water withdrawn from aquifer, 

rivers … for irrigation & farm 
management per ton of raw material 
produced

Eliminate leaks 
Introduce drip irrigation, advanced irrigation 
management, water sensors …

Improve on-farm water use Improve cleaning in dairy palor 
Improve cleaning of green coffee beans

protect & 
replenish 
watershed
"protect"

Build buffer / green strips, 
protect sources and rivers banks

 
Reduce run off to rivers, maintain 
water in the watershed area, increase 
replenishment rate of natural reservoirs, 
reduce soil erosion, improve quality of 
water returned to watershed

Good quality water discharged in water 
bodies to replenish watershed

Create grass strip along rivers, or on the 
borders of the field

Revegetate degraded areas Reforest unused and degraded areas

Treat farm effluents
Improve manure management 
Treat green coffee washing water

Reconnect natural water bodies 
Increased replenishment rate of local 
Watershed watershed

Increase surfaces of wetlands, restore natural 
drainage network

30



annex 2

Themes Subthemes Q-No Question

Soil

Soil Cover 
(Living Root in 

Ground)

1.01 Do you apply mulch or grow cover crops on your land?

1.02 What is the percentage of crop land planted with cover crops (grown in the field min. 2 months)? (acreage with cover crop/total arable and permanent acreage x 
100)

1.03 What is the percentage of crop land with application of crop residues, mulch, grass clipping, straw, etc. ? (acreage with application/total arable and permanent 
acreage x 100)

1.04 On average, for how many months the soil is covered by an annual crop, a cover crop and mulch (i.e. a crop other than coffee, cocoa or other perennial trees)?

Erosion 
Assessment

1.05 Do you implement any form of erosion control (e.g. terracing, contour planting, windbreaks, soil coverage)?

1.06 What is the percentage of agricultural land with severe water and wind erosion (signs: siltation, sheet-rill-gully erosion, flying dust; as estimation)?

Soil Health 
Assessment 

Crop Nutrition

1.07 Do you conduct a soil analysis (at least once every 3 years or more frequent)?

1.08 What is the soil organic matter level in your soils?

1.09 Soil pH

1.10 Do you compost your farm residues (formal composting process)?

1.11 Percentage organic fertiliser vs total fertiliser applied (organic/ total applied x 100)

1.12 Do you calculate your fertilizer plan on the basis of crop nutrient requirements (e.g. recent soil analysis, productivity, crop cycle)?

1.13 Do you follow the 4R principles (Right Amount, Right Source, Right Time, Right Place) when applying fertilizers?  

Fertilizer 
Productivity 1.14 Synthetic Fertilizer Productivity (FP) = Y/F (Yield/ Synthetic Fertiliser applied) 

Biodiversity

Crop Protection

2.01 Are you applying chemical insecticides and/or fungicides in your farm?

2.02
Do you follow the IPM principles for crop protection? (IPM includes pest identification; monitoring and assessing pest numbers and damage; economic treshould 
for when management action is needed; preventing pest problems; using a combination of biological, cultural, physical/mechanical and chemical management 
tools)

Weed 
Managment

2.03 Are you applying chemical herbicides in your farm?

2.04 What is the percentage of cropland with synthetic herbicide application? (Acreage with synthetic herbicide control/ total acreage x 100)

2.05 Which integrated weed management practices do you apply?

Crop Diversity 
and Resilience 
(Renovation)

2.06 What is the percentage of coffee and/or cocoa treestock with new improved variaties (disease/ pest /drought tolerant)? 

Crop Carbon 
Footprint

2.07 Is the Carbon Footprint of the farm/dedicated supply chain known?

2.08 What is the Carbon Footprint of the farm or the dedicated supply chain (in MT CO2e / MT GC)?

Land Use 2.09 Number of years farm has been in use

Biodiversity 
management

2.10 What is the percentage of farmland with biodiversity infrastructures (windbreaks, hedges, border trees, natural habitats, green belts, riparian buffer, etc)?

2.11 Do you keep bee hives in your farm (own bee hives or termporary during flowering season)?

Agroforestry

2.12 What is the percentage of agriculture land dedicated to agroforestry (non-crop trees like native trees, shade trees, nitrofixing trees)?

2.13 What is the percentage of shade cover on the permanent cropland (coffee and cocoa)?

2.14 Number of different shade tree species (excl. commercial tree species)

Land 
Intercropped

2.15 What is the percentage of permanent crop land  (coffee, cocoa, etc.) intercropped with multiple commercial crops?

2.16 Number of different commercial species (crops) in the farm

Water

Irrigation
3.01 Which irrigation practices do you apply?

3.02 Do you monitor soil moisture or tree condition (flower bud development, leaf wilting) before applying irrigation?

Water 
Poductivity 3.03 Water footprint (l/kg/yr) for total crop produced (both irrigation and wet processing combined where applicable)

Waterways
3.04 What is the shortest distance between field (fertilizer and pesticide application area) and the water body?

3.05 Are the riparian buffer strips covered with natural vegetation (hedges, bushes, trees, etc)?

Farmer

Record keeping 4.01 Do you keep farm records (income, expenses, inputs, etc)?

Profitability
4.02 Do you calculate your profit and loss?

4.03 Estimated household income from the farm (USD/yr)

Standard of 
Living 4.04 Have you experienced a cash flow shortage period during the last year?

Training and 
Competencies 

4.05 Have you received training on Farm Economics and Business Skills?

4.06 Have you received training on Regenerative Agriculture Principles and Practices? 

In addition, dedicated tools have been tailored for dairy and annual crops. 

FARM ASSESSMENT TOOL
Perennial crops

31



annex 3

Nestlé and The Nature Conservancy (TNC) 
initiated a strategic and technical collaboration 
with the aim of enhancing Nestlé’s global 
framework for regenerative agriculture. Within 
this scope of work, global and regional experts 
from TNC provided inputs on the Nestlé Regen 
Ag Framework, assessment tools, approaches, 
and guidance documents. 

This Annex explains additional more 
sophisticated and focused KPIs and tools , 
that can help to develop specific areas further. 
We strongly recommend Nestlé Market 
Teams to consider using these additional tools 
depending on the specific objectives of local 
initiatives.

Specific KPIs

Regionalization of KPIs and target values: 
KPIs need regional specificity – this is 
especially important for quantitative KPIs 
subject to specific climate or soil constraints 
(e.g., buildup of SOM, cover crops). Markets 
are encouraged to set regional targets for KPIs 
and to add context specific KPIs. 

Soil health measurements: Target values 
for soil indicators are highly dependent on 
local context (climate, soil type) as well as 
the choice of analytical method and sampling 
design. The following soil health indicators are 
recommended.

•	 Basic: Soil Organic Matter / Advanced: Soil 
Organic Carbon. SOM is a good indicator 
for soil fertility and is typically measured 
in commercial soil tests. SOC requires use 
of an elemental analyzer and is better for 
measuring changes in soil carbon stocks.

•	 Basic: Standard nutrient testing (pH, NPK, 
CEC, salinity as needed).

•	 Advanced: Aggregate stability – this is a 
good measure of structural health.

•	 Advanced: Water holding capacity – this 
is important for yield resilience. Consider 

that it is measured in different ways and 
may be difficult to compare across labs.

Biodiversity and Habitats: At a basic level, 
measuring the absolute and proportional area 
of natural and semi-natural habitat on each 
farm is a good first step. However, landscape 
configuration, habitat connectivity, and crop 
diversity are also important factors affecting 
biodiversity conservation. KPIs should also 
include measures that would provide insight 
into the enabling conditions for biodiversity 
action, for example, the prevalence of land 
ownership within a sourcing region.

•	 Average field size
•	 # of crops grown
•	 Absolute and proportional area under 

agroforestry or silvo-pasture
•	 # of varieties grown for major crops within 

a specific time frame
•	 Total area in native and semi-native habitat
•	 % total riparian area with vegetated 

buffers

Yield improvement vs. stability: regions 
vary widely in their average yield for a given 
crop. In areas of already high productivity, 
reducing yield variability may be a more 
appropriate goal than just increasing average 
yields. In smallholder systems, increasing 
yields and reducing crop contaminations 
(e.g., mycotoxins) and loss in storage are also 
important goals. 

Including relevant KPIs, targeted as 
appropriate to smallholders, commercial 
farmers, or both is recommended. 

Fertilizer productivity: a good integrated 
soil fertility management approach includes 
organic inputs and is based on macro-and 
micro-nutrient requirements: this helps to 
define the right total quantity. However, 
maximizing Nutrient Use Efficiency (NUE) may 
not capture water pollution caused by poor 
nutrient management. In many dairy systems, 
management of manure resources is critical  
 

MOVING ONE STEP AHEAD
Additional tools recommended by The Nature Conservancy (TNC)

32



annex 3

to avoid overapplication of phosphorus while 
meeting nitrogen goals.

It is recommended to include KPIs on nitrogen 
and phosphorus use efficiency (NUE/PUE) 
based on all nutrient sources (fertilizer, 
manure, compost, mulch) and establish target 
ranges that are based on scientific literature 
and local knowledge (values of 0.5-0.8 are 
viable in many systems). NUE and PUE 
are effective proxies for nutrient losses to 
waterways and risks of water pollution.

Tools and information sources 
recommended by TNC

Depending on the specific objectives of a local 
regenerative agriculture initiative, the below 
tools and information sources can be helpful 
and provide further guidance for a stronger 
impact. In addition, we encourage exploration 
of local resource and education materials on 
these topics, as it suits by design the local 
context.

Soil Health Measurement
•	 Soils Revealed: https://soilsrevealed.org/ - 

global maps of soil organic carbon trends, 
predictions. This tool maps areas of 
opportunity for soil restoration and carbon 
storage. 

•	 Several free tools are available for 
designing soil sampling campaigns, 
including Stratifi (v3.1)

•	 Soil Health Institute Resource Library: 
https://soilhealthinstitute.org/resources/ 
- database of scientific research, tools, 
and educational materials related to soil 
health.

Watershed context

It is recommended to provide guidance to 
suppliers on how to define KPIs and targets 
based on local water risks. Markets may adopt 
locally relevant tools such as the Nutrient 
Tracking Tool (available in much of the US), 
ANCA in the Netherlands, etc. Global tools 
such as RUSLE can be used to estimate 
erosion from water runoff.

Biodiversity Action Planning
•	 Biodiversity Action Areas: In alignment 

with the Science Based Targets Network 
(SBTN) guidance, TNC has developed a 
framework for identifying and managing 
areas of high value for biodiversity 
conservation in agricultural landscapes. 
Biodiversity Action Areas are used as an 
input to regional and site specific action 
plans. TNC’s partners can make progress 
towards managing the negative impacts 
of agricultural land uses on biodiversity 
and water security. 

•	 Agrobiodiversity Index: methodology 
for measuring the current state of 
agrobiodiversity in markets and 
agricultural production. Guidance 
provided to the public by CGIAR through 
the CGSpace.

•	 Tools like the USDA’s AgBufferBuilder 
can aid farmers in design of functional 
farm landscapes, while tools like Buffer$ 
provide a simple method of analyzing 
the cost and benefits of installing 
conservation buffers on-farm.

•	 The Nature Conservancy’s Edge of Field 
Roadmap: https://nature.org/edgeoffield 
- Roadmap for advancing edge of field 
practices that benefit water quality, 
soils, and biodiversity. The roadmap 
was created for the U.S. context, but the 
priority practices outlined within the report 
are applicable in many geographies. 

Agricultural Practices Support & Evidence 
Databases

•	 TNC’s Ag Evidence tool: https://www.
agevidence.org/ - It visualizes the impacts 
of regenerative or conservation agriculture 
practices on key outcomes like nutrient 
runoff, GHG emissions, crop yields, water 
quality and soil health in the Midwestern 
US. This can be used on reference farms 
to choose regional priority practices. 

•	 Crop sequence calculators and guidance. 
For example, those provided by the USDA 
Agricultural Research Service’s Crop 
Sequence Calculators and Sustainable 
Agriculture Research and Education’s 
(SARE) regionally-adapted rotation 
sequence examples.

•	 Midwest Cover Crops Council’s Cover 
Crop Decision Tool matches potential 
cover crops with specific cash crop 

33

https://soilsrevealed.org/
https://charliebettigole.users.earthengine.app/view/stratifi-beta-v21
https://soilhealthinstitute.org/resources/
https://cgspace.cgiar.org/handle/10568/106478
https://www.fs.usda.gov/nac/resources/tools/AgBufferBuilder.shtml
https://www.fs.usda.gov/nac/resources/tools/buffer$.shtml
https://www.agevidence.org/
https://www.agevidence.org/
https://www.ars.usda.gov/plains-area/mandan-nd/ngprl/docs/crop-sequence-calculator/
https://www.ars.usda.gov/plains-area/mandan-nd/ngprl/docs/crop-sequence-calculator/
https://www.sare.org/publications/building-soils-for-better-crops/crop-rotations/rotation-examples/
https://www.sare.org/publications/building-soils-for-better-crops/crop-rotations/rotation-examples/
https://mccc.msu.edu/covercroptool/
https://mccc.msu.edu/covercroptool/


annex 3

rotations within a regional context.

•	 4R Nutrient Stewardship Training & 
Certification: https://nutrientstewardship.
org/4rs/ - program to advance nutrient 
stewardship. Training modules available 
on the website in addition to in-person 
certification options. A 4Rs manual is 
also provided by the International Plant 
Nutrition Institute at https://www.ipni.
net/4r

•	 Smallholder systems: There are many 
existing efforts to promote sustainable 
and regenerative agriculture in 
smallholder systems that Nestlé can 
draw on to support the implementation of 
the Regen Ag Framework. One example 
is the work of the global development 
organization, Digital Green, which delivers 
innovative digital solutions for connecting 
farmers for peer-to-peer learning, 
providing training and agronomic advice, 
and farm data management. Another 
example specific to the topic of nutrient 
and pest management is the work of 
Agrocares, which provides data-driven 
tools to support precision farming in 

smallholder systems. Their technology is 
intended to be affordable and reliable in 
remote areas. Their line of SoilCares tools 
provides rapid, low-cost soil testing for 
monitoring soil health. 

Responsible Pest Management Framework

There are precompetitive efforts to define 
indicators and improve measurement of 
integrated pest management. One existing 
effort is the Responsible Pest Management 
(RPM) Framework that is organized by The 
Sustainability Consortium. The framework 
aims to provide an innovative, science-based 
approach for measuring responsible pest 
management. It outlines a set of practices 
and decisions made on-farm that contribute 
to four major outcomes: long-term system 
resilience, environmental stewardship, optimal 
production, and human/animal health. The 
RPM framework could serve as a starting point 
for Nestlé as it develops IPM programs for its 
regenerative agriculture programs.  

34

https://nutrientstewardship.org/4rs/
https://nutrientstewardship.org/4rs/
https://www.ipni.net/4r
https://www.ipni.net/4r
https://www.digitalgreen.org/
https://www.agrocares.com/
https://sustainabilityconsortium.org/project/responsible-pest-management-rpm-framework/
https://sustainabilityconsortium.org/project/responsible-pest-management-rpm-framework/


annex 3

List of international tools and information sources recommended by TNC

Tool Owner Focus area Content

Soils Revealed Soil
Global maps of soil organic carbon trends. 
Maps opportunities for soil restoration & 
carbon storage.

Responsible Pest 
Management 
Framework

The Sustainability Consortium Biodiversity & Pest Man. Science-based approach for measuring 
responsible pest management

RUSLE Soil & Water Estimate erosion from runoff. Guidance how 
to develop KPIs based on local water risks

AgEvidence TNC Regen Ag Practices

Data visualization from a regional analysis 
of the impact of conservation ag practices 
on climate mitigation, crop yields, soil 
properties, nutrient runoff and water quality.

Stratifi Soil Designing soil sampling campaigns

Biodiversity  
Action Areas TNC Biodiversity

Process for identifying and managing areas 
of high value for biodiversity conservation in 
agricultural landscapes

AgroCares Agrocares Smallholder precision 
farming

Support precision farming in smallholder 
farming systems

SoilCares Agrocares Soil Low-cost soil testing for monitoring of soil 
health parameters

Nutrient  
Tracking Tool

Soil Guidance how to define KPIs and targets 
based on local water risks (nutrient runoff)

Soil Health Institute 
Resource Library

Soil Database of scientific research, tools, and 
educational materials related to soil health

CGSpace CGIAR Biodiversity
Agrobiodiversity Index: methodology 
for measuring the current state of 
agrobiodiversity in agricultural production

Edge of Field 
Roadmap

TNC Biodiversity Edge of field practices that benefit water 
quality, soils, and biodiversity

4R Nutrient 
Stewardship 
Training

Nutrient Stewardship Regen Ag Practices Certification and program to advance 
nutrient stewardship

4Rs manual International Plant Nutrition Institute Regen Ag Practices Manual of 4R integrated nutrient 
management

35






